 
 
 
PROSPECTUS 
2025-2026
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
JAMIA HAMDARD 
 
'Committed to Excellence in Higher Education' 
 
Jamia Hamdard (JH) was declared as a Deemed-to-be University by the Ministry of Human Resource 
Development (now Ministry of Education), Government of India on the recommendation of University Grants 
Commission (UGC) under Section 3 of the UGC Act 1956 after amalgamation of six Institutions set up by the 
Late Founder Chancellor PadmaShri and Padma Bhushan Hakeem Abdul Hameed, namely (i) The 
Institute of History of Medicine and Medical Research; (ii) Indian Institute of Islamic Studies; (iii) 
Hamdard Tibbi College; (iv) Hamdard College of Pharmacy; (v) Majeedia Hospital; and (vi) The School 
of Nursing situated  in Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi as Jamia Hamdard Society on the directions of the 
Ministry of HRD, Government of India.  The Ministry of HRD, Government issued a notification on 10th 
May 1989 declaring Jamia Hamdard as Deemed to be University.  
 
The campus is spread in the sprawling 94 acres of land situated near the Jahanapana Forest adjacent to the 
Tughlakabad Fort in South Delhi.  
 
At present, Jamia Hamdard consists of ten Schools, namely, School of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, School of Humanities and Social Scienes,  School of 
Nursing Sciences and Allied Health, School of Unani Medical Education and Research, School of 
Interdisciplinary Sciences, Medical School, School of Management and Business Studies, School of 
Engineering Sciences and Technology,  School of Law, Centre for Mass and Media Communication 
Studies, Centre for Distance and Open Education. It has two hospitals, modern medicine and Unani 
medicine, with a capacity of 700 beds and 100 beds respectively.  Unani Medical Hospital has been 
accreditated with the NABH Hospital.  It has got a big Central Library and Hamdard Archives and 
Research Centre.  Jamia Hamdard has an off campus located in Kannur, Kerala.  Jamia Hamdard Society 
is the sponsoring body of the “Jamia Hamdard – Deemed to be University”. We have Central 
Instrumentation Facilities for various Schools which cater to the need of the research, both in-house and 
outside.   We have more than 30 Memorandum of Understanding signed with the research institutions and 
universities. These include DIST, CSIR, ICMR, DBT and DRDO, etc.  Funding agencies of Jamia 
Hamdard are: Hamdard National Foundation-HECA, University Grants Commission and the Government 
of Delhi 
 
The University has been maintaining a steady progress in all facets in its existence of 36 years and is both nationally 
and internationally recognized for the quality of teaching and research. The overall progress in this period has been 
excellent in terms of infrastructure and maintaining the standards which is evident from the placement records, high 
quality of research, publications and patents.  The University has been a recipient of special grants such as the 
PURSE (Promotion for University Research in Science and Engineering) grant, and got the status of the Centre for 
Excellence in Unani Medicine from the Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India. It is also recipient of grants 
from the STUITI, a DST Scheme, DST's PURSE (Promotion for University Research in Science and Engineering) 
Grant and ICMR Grant.   
 
Jamia Hamdard is the first University in Delhi to have accreditated in ‘A’ category by the National 
Assessment and Accreditation Council in 2003 and continued to maintain the ‘A’ Grade in NAAC in three 
consecutive assessments.  In the last assessment made by the NAAC, Jamia Hamdard has been placed in 
A+ category with a score card of 3.41.   
 
Since the very inception of the NIRF Rankings conducted by the Ministry of Education, Government of 
India, Jamia Hamdard has been ranked one of the top 50 institutions in the country.  The Pharmacy School 
has been ranked the number one institution in the country as per the NIRF surveys conducted by the 
Ministry of Education.  This is the six times, out of the nine times, our Pharmacy School topped the 
rankings in Pharmacy category.  Our Management School is also ranked one of the hundred institutions in 
the country.   
 
Due to the consistent research programmes made by the University, ten Departments of the School of Chemical and 
Life Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and School 
of Engineering Sciences got DST-FIST (Funds for Improvement of Science and Technology) Grants from the 
Ministry of Science and Technology.  Also, seven Departments of Pharmacy School and Science School got UGC-
SAP (Special Assistance Programmes) and a couple of the Departments got the SAP more than once.  We have 
more than ten thousand research publications and has 2.50 lakhs citations.  
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
THE FOUNDER 
 
 
 
The Founder-Chancellor of Jamia Hamdard, Hakeem Abdul Hameed 
(1908-1999), was a renowned physician of the Unani system of 
medicine, and a noted philanthropist who dedicated his life to serving 
the neediest members of society. Admired by all and counting global 
dignitaries among his patients, Hakeem Saheb, as he was popularly 
known, kept public service as his driving force throughout his career. 
 
He was conferred with Padma Shri in 1965 and Padma Bhushan in 1992 
by the Government of India. He was awarded the prestigious Avicenna 
Award by the erstwhile USSR in 1983. In 
 
October 2000, the Research Centre for Islamic History, Art, and Culture in Istanbul, Turkey, presented the IRCICA 
Award to him posthumously for ‘Patronage in Preservation of Cultural Heritage and promotion of Scholarship’. He 
won various other awards and distinctions in his lifetime. He also served as a Chancellor of Aligarh Muslim 
University. 
 
Over a period of time, Hakim Saheb set up a complex of educational institutions in Hamdard Nagar, Tughlakabad, 
which were finally amalgamated as Jamia Hamdard Society as per the directives of the Ministry of Human 
Resource Development (now Ministry of Education), Government of India,  for getting a deemed to be status to 
these institutions. After following all procedures and rules, Jamia Hamdard Society came into existence in 1989 and 
got the Deemed to be University status on 10th  May 1989. The first institute to come up on the Tughlakabad land 
was the Institute of History of Medicine and Medical Research (IHMMR). The foundation stone for this institute 
was laid on November 15, 1962, by the then Prime Minister of India, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru. The finished 
building was later inaugurated by the then Prime Minister, Mrs. Indira Gandhi. When a Deemed to be University 
status was granted in 1989, Jamia Hamdard was inaugurated by Mr. Rajiv Gandhi, the then Prime Minister. 
 
Apart from Jamia Hamdard, Hakeem Saheb set up a number of other enduring institutions, including Hamdard 
National Foundation, Hamdard Education Society, Hamdard Study Circle, Business and Employment Bureau, 
Hamdard Residential  Public School, Ghalib Academy, Centre for South Asian Studies, etc. He was also a Founder 
Patron of India Islamic Cultural Centre. 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
  CHANCELLOR 
 
Mr. Hammad Ahmed 
 
As one of the founding members of Hamdard National Foundation at its 
inception in 1964, Mr. Hammad Ahmed brings with him infinite wisdom 
and experience. Over more than 50 years, he has forged Hamdard National 
Foundation into one of India’s most respected charitable organizations. He 
is currently President, Hamdard Learning and Welfare Society and 
Hamdard National Foundation (India) - HECA and Co-Chairman of 
Hamdard National Foundation (India). 
 
His charming and inspiring personality borrows dimensions from his father, 
Late Hakeem Abdul Hameed, the founder of Hamdard National Foundation and Jamia Hamdard. Mr. Hammad 
Ahmed’s quiet modesty hides the magnitude of his achievements in introducing new initiatives for contributions 
to society, and his relentless commitment to the charitable cause has improved the lives of countless people. 
 
Mr.  Hammad Ahmed has been involved in Jamia Hamdard since before it gained Deemed University status in 
1989. Over the years, he has served in the Executive Council, Finance Committee and various other advisory 
bodies of the University and has championed the growth of Jamia Hamdard through sustained personal attention 
and interest. 
 
Since joining Hamdard Laboratories India as its Sales and Marketing Head in 1973, he has overseen a meteoric 
rise in business and the Hamdard name, in the process establishing himself as one of India’s prominent business 
leaders. He is currently the Chief Mutawalli (Trustee) of Hamdard Laboratories India (Foods). 
 
Educated in Sherwood College, Nainital, and then in Cornwall, UK and New York, USA for further studies, Mr.  
Hammad Ahmed has inculcated a strong sense of discipline in his life and work, and the results are self-evident.
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
   VICE CHANCELLOR 
 
Professor (Dr.) Mohammad Afshar Alam 
  
Professor Mohammad Afshar Alam has been appointed as Vice Chancellor of 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi. He was the Dean of School of Engineering 
Sciences and Technology at Jamia Hamdard New Delhi till now and continues 
to be a Professor of Computer Science.  
He did his Post graduation (MCA) from the Aligarh Muslim University and 
(Ph.D.) from Jamia Milia Islamia which are one of the most premier 
institutions of our country.  
With an illustrious career spanning over 29 years, Prof. Afshar Alam’s 
journey at Jamia Hamdard has been marked by important roles, including 
Head of Computer Centre, Dean of Management and Information 
Technology, Dean of Engineering Sciences and Technology, Dean, Students 
Welfare, Foreign Students Advisor, Finance Officer, etc. His visionary 
initiatives include the founding of the Computer Centre/Department of 
Computer Science. During his current tenure, Jamia Hamdard has got the 
‘A+’ Grade in NAAC Accreditation in its fourth Cycle with a score of 3.41. 
Prof. Afshar Alam’s expertise extends across diverse domains, encompassing Software Re-
engineering, Data Mining, Bio-Informatics, Fuzzy Databases, and Sustainable Development. A mentor 
par excellence, he has guided over 35 PhD scholars, overseen 200+ postgraduate research projects, and 
authored a remarkable 12 books, accompanied by 175+ research papers in esteemed journals. As a 
visionary leader, he has inculcated a culture of excellence. As an academician, he was invited to many 
countries across the globe including Australia, Singapore, Malaysia, Republic of China, UAE, KSA, 
Nepal, Syria, Yemen, Iran, etc. for delivering Special Lectures, Plenary Talks in Conferences, etc. 
Acknowledged for his outstanding contributions, Prof. Alam was honoured with prestigious awards, 
including the Bharat Ratna Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam Top Icon Award, Time Magazine India’s Excellence 
Iconic Award, AMP Award for Excellence in Education, Cooperative Citizen Award, World 
Environment Day Award, Spardha Shree Award, Mahatma Gandhi International Peace Award, Most 
Inspiring Leader Award in 2022  (on the occasion of the Birth Anniversary of Dr. Sarvapalli 
Radhakrishnan),  Outstanding Global Leadership Award-2023, Singapore, Life-time Achievement 
Award  from the Confederation of Indian Universities and International Association of Educators for 
World Peace 2023, “Vice-Chancellor of the Year 2024” by Making India Employable, Mumbai, etc. 
He is also the member of many government bodies including University Grants Commission (UGC), 
All India Council of Technical Education (AlCTE), National Assessment and Accreditation Council 
(NAAC), Department of Science & Technology (DST), etc. 
In his role as Chairman of the NAAC Peer Teams, Prof. Alam spearheads assessments of colleges and 
universities and also actively contributes to various government committees. His unwavering 
commitment to educational and research excellence has left an indelible mark on academia’s future. 
Possessing rare administrative acumen, he has cultivated a culture of innovation through a 
collaborative approach, promoting cutting-edge research and interdisciplinary collaboration for the 
future of works and jobs in an Industry 4.0 environment. Prof. Alam is a visionary leader who has 
shaped the trajectory of academic excellence.  
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
CONTENT 
 
S.No 
Content 
Page Number 
1. 
Jamia Hamdard Administration 
1 
2. 
Schools and Centres of Jamia Hamdard 
School of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (SPER) 
2 
School of Nursing Sciences & Allied Health (SNSAH) 
11 
School of Engineering Sciences & Technology (SEST) 
32 
School of Management & Business Studies (SMBS) 
42 
School of Chemical & Life Sciences (SCLS) 
51 
School of Unani Medical Education & Research (SUMER) 
71 
School of Humanities & Social Sciences (SHSS) 
79 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (HILSR) 
92 
School of Interdisciplinary Sciences & Technology (SIST) 
97 
School of Skills and Vocational Studies (SSVS) 
110 
Centre for Media & Mass Communication Studies (CMMS) 
118 
Research and Development Cell (R&D Cell) 
121 
Centre For Training and Development 
123 
Centre for Teaching Support and Innovations (CTSI) 
125 
Industry-Academia Partnership Cell 
126 
Jamia Hamdard Residential Coaching Academy (JHRCA) 
133 
Centre for Distance & Online Education 
135 
3. 
Jamia Hamdard Kannur Campus 
138 
4. 
General Information & Admission Guidelines 
142 
5. 
Reservation Policy of Jamia Hamdard 
148 
6. 
Guidelines for Admission of International Students & 
150 
Sponsored Category Candidates 
7. 
Fee Concession, Scholarships & Fellowships 
160 
8. 
Fee for Academic Year 2025-2026 
164 
9. 
Hostel Fee and Rules 
183 
10. 
Sports and Cultural Activities 
187 
11. 
Hakeem Mohammad Said Central Library 
193 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard
 
 
 
JAMIA HAMDARD TARANA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
JAMIA HAMDARD ADMINISTRATION 
  
 
Chancellor 
Mr.Hammad Ahmed 
 
 
Vice Chancellor 
Prof. (Dr) M. Afshar Alam 
 
 
Registrar 
Dr. M. A. Sikandar 
 
 
Finance Officer 
Mr. Ashu Kumar (Officiating) 
 
 
Controller of Examinations 
Mr. Syed Saud Akhtar 
Dean Academics 
Prof. S. Raisuddin 
Dean, School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
Prof. Farhan Jalees Ahmed 
 
 
Dean, School of Nursing Sciences and Allied Health 
Prof. Shakir Ali 
Dean, School of Engineering Sciences & Technology 
Prof. Farheen Siddiqui 
Dean, School of Management & Business Studies 
Prof. S. Nadimul Haque 
 
 
Dean, School of Chemical & Life Sciences 
Prof. Suhel Parvez 
 
 
Dean, School of Unani Medical Education and Research 
Prof. Asim Ali Khan 
 
 
Dean, School of Humanities & Social Sciences 
Prof. S Mehartaj Begum 
 
 
Dean, Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research 
Prof. Saleena K Basheer 
 
 
Dean, Hamdard Institute Medical Sciences and Research 
Prof. Sudhir Kumar Jain 
Dean, School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology 
Prof. Angamuthu 
Selvapandiyan 
Director, School of Skills & Vocational studies (SSVS) 
Prof. (Dr.) N Ravichandran 
 
 
Director, Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies 
Prof. Reshma Nasreen 
Director, Center for Distance and Online Education 
Prof. Mahmooduzzafar (Offg) 
 
 
Dean, Students' Welfare 
Prof. Reshma Nasreen 
 
 
Principal, Rufaida College of Nursing 
Prof. Veena Sharma 
Chief Proctor 
Prof. M Shaharyar 
 
 
Foreign Students Advisor 
Prof. Zeenat Iqbal 
 
 
Provost (Boys) 
Prof. Md. Shahnawaz Abdin 
 
 
Provost (Girls) 
Prof. Syeedun Nisa 
 
 
Director, IQAC 
Prof. S. Raisuddin 
Director, (R & D) cell 
Prof. Shakir Ali 
 
 
University Librarian 
Dr. Akhtar Parvez 
Chief Med. Supdtt., Majeedia Unani Hospital 
Prof. Asim Ali Khan 
Director (Admissions) 
Mr. Sandeep Kohli 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
SCHOOL OF PHARMACEUTICAL 
EDUCATION & RESEARCH (SPER) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof. (Dr.) Farhan Jalees Ahmed 
 
The School of Pharmaceutical Education & Research (SPER), formerly Faculty of Pharmacy, 
which was established as Hamdard College of Pharmacy in 1972, is one of the most prestigious 
institutions of Pharmaceutical Education in India with global standards and has been ranked as 
No. 1 amongst National Institutions Ranking Framework (NIRF) -2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, 
2024 and at No. 2 in 2023 by the Ministry of Education, Govt. of India. The School achieved a 
significant milestone by securing the top position in the field of Pharmaceutics and 
Pharmacognosy in thein the Global Lifetime Ranking by Scholar-GPS. The School recently 
celebrated its glorious fifty years of existence. The School is approved and recognized by 
Pharmacy Council of India (PCI). The SPER continues to build on its rich history and tradition 
of excellence by offering quality Pharmacy education in India. 
The School offers Undergraduate (D. Pharm. & B. Pharm.), Postgraduate (M. Pharm. in 
Pharmaceutics, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Pharmacology, Pharmacognosy, Pharmaceutical 
Quality Assurance, Pharmaceutical Analysis, Pharmacy Practice and Pharmaceutical 
Biotechnology) and Doctoral (Pharmaceutics, Pharmaceutics with specialization in 
Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance, Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Chemistry  with  
specialization in Pharmaceutical Analysis, Pharmacology, Pharmacology with specialization in 
Pharmacy Practice and Pharmaceutical Medicine, Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry, 
Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry with specialization in Pharmaceutical Biotechnology) 
programs. 
 
 
The School is a powerhouse of academic and research excellence in the field of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences. Our modern infrastructure coupled with seasoned faculty has been instrumental in 
providing world class pharmacy professionals to industry, academia and research-based 
institutions across the world. The school has collaborations outside the University both from 
academic and research institutions as well as pharmaceutical industries. 
Industry sponsored projects are also being executed for companies like Sun Pharma, Dabur 
Research foundation, Jubilant Life Sciences, Hamdard Labs India Ltd (Food Div.), AIMIL 
Pharmaceuticals, Dolphin International, Fermish Clinical Technology, GBC, Beijing, China 
and Multani Pharmaceuticals, Avitech Nutrition and Tulips Lab. 
A separate pharmacy block dedicated to research in advanced fields of Formulation Research 
and 
Nanomedicine, 
Neurobehavioral 
Pharmacology, 
Microbial 
and 
Pharmaceutical 
Biotechnology, Bioactive Natural Products, Drug Design and Medicinal Chemistry with state-
of-the-art facilities is an integral part of the school. 
The school consists of four Departments: 
1. Department of Pharmaceutics 
2. Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
3. Department of Pharmacology 
4. Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry 
 
 
  
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICS 
 
The Department of Pharmaceutics offers two master’s degree programs in Pharmaceutics and 
Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance and Ph.D. in Pharmaceutics and Ph.D. in Pharmaceutics 
with specialization in Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance. The students qualifying these courses 
meet the current and future requirements of R&D personnel of the Pharmaceutical Industry, 
academia, regulatory and marketing. The research thrust areas of the department includes oral 
bioavailability enhancement using polymer and lipid-based approaches, transdermal drug 
delivery system, ocular drug delivery systems using polymeric and lipid carriers, targeted 
nanoparticles for brain and tumor targeting, intranasal drug delivery systems for CNS 
disorders, biodegradable targeted retention devices for periodontal infections, herbal drug 
delivery systems for psoriasis, acne and vitiligo, transmucosal drug delivery systems for 
proteins and antihypertensive agents. The department lays emphasis on integrated research 
approach on modern and indigenous drugs and their formulations. The department is well 
equipped, funded by various funding agencies and is supported under UGC-SAP and DST-
FIST programs. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
        Dr. Asgar Ali, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Farhan Jalees Ahmad, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Yasmin Sultana, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Javed Ali, PhD, Professor & Head 
Dr. Saima Amin, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Mohd Aqil, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Zeenat Iqbal, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Mohammad Aamir Mirza, PhD, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Prashant Kesharwani, PhD,  Assistant Professor (On Extraordinary leave) 
Dr. Rabea Parveen, PhD, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Saba Khan, PhD, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nazeer Hasan, PhD, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Pooja Jain, PhD, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Azka, PhD, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Ali Sartaj, PhD, Assistant Professor 
  
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTRY 
 
The Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry is engaged in research related to Drug Discovery and 
Development. The Department offers Master’s degree programs in two specialization, M. Pharm. 
(Pharmaceutical Chemistry) &M. Pharm. (Pharmaceutical Analysis) and Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry and Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical Chemistry with specialization in Pharmaceutical Analysis. 
The department is currently engaged inindependent as well as collaborative research in Drug Design 
and Development, Medicinal Chemistry, Peptide Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Solid State Chemistry, 
and Drug Analysis using hyphenated techniques. Current areas of research include Anticancer, 
Antimalarial, Antimicrobials, Antidiabetes, Cardio protective, Anticonvulsant, Anti-inflammatory, 
Hepatoprotective, and Anti-depressants etc.  
The department is well equipped with research infrastructure and is supported under DST-FIST 
program and funded by various funding agencies. The department caters the need of the 
Pharmaceutical Industry working in the domain of drug discovery, analytical R & D, quality control 
labs as well as academia. 
  
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Dr. Sandhya Bawa, PhD, Professor & Head 
 
Dr. Gita Chawla, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Asif Hussain, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Mymoona Akhtar, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Shahar Yar, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Mumtaz Alam, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Ozair Alam, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Shaquiquzzaman, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Jamshed Haneef, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Rikeshwer Prasad Dewangan, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Rafi Haider, PhD, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Fatima Naaz, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Azhar Iqbal, PhD, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sharba Tasneem, PhD, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Kashif Iqbal, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
 
  
 
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACOLOGY 
 
The Department of Pharmacologyoffers master’s program in Pharmacology, Pharmacy 
Practice and Ph.D. program in Pharmacology, Pharmacology with specialization in Pharmacy 
Practice and Ph.D.in Pharmaceutical Medicine. The primary objective of the department is to 
train the studentspreparing for careers in pharmacology including teaching and research in an 
academic or industrial setting or in pharmaceutical companies and government research 
organizations. 
 
The M. Pharm in Pharmacy Practice programis augmented with the Clinical Research Program 
of the Medical School. The students of the Pharmacy Practice Program are trained by doctors 
at HAH CentenaryHospitalin possibledrug interactions and patientcounselling for dosage 
regimenand other healthcare related queries. 
 
The research thrust areas of the department are Neuropharmacology mainly research on 
mechanisms and new therapeutic targets for Epilepsy, Alzheimer’s disease, Depression etc., 
Cardiovascular 
Pharmacology 
mainly 
research 
on 
metabolic 
disorders 
including 
Atherosclerosis, Obesity,Hypertension etc., Endocrinology including Diabetes mellitus, 
Osteoporosis, and Clinical pharmacology. The Department is well-equipped with research 
infrastructure and is supported under UGC-SAP, DST-FIST and MODROBS program.` 
 
Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical Medicine is a unique, first in country program. The program 
illustrates utilization of academic excellence, professional expertise and optimal fund use by 
joint University- Industry effort. The students qualifying this course meet the current and 
future requirements of R&D personnel from the Pharmaceutical Industry/Academia. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Dr. Uma Bhandari, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Shibli Jameel Ahmad, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. DivyaVohora, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Manju Sharma, PhD, Professor & Head 
Dr. S. Ehtaishamul Haque, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Abul Kalam Najmi, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Akhtar, PhD, Professor 
 
Dr. Kiran Dubey, PhD, Associate Professor 
 
Dr. Mohammad Ahmed Khan, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Suruchi Singh, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Afroz Ahmad, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Bushra Parveen, PhD, Assistant Professor
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF PHARMACOGNOSY & PHYTOCHEMISTRY 
The Department of Pharmacognosy &Phytochemistry is involved in research in the field of 
Drug discovery from natural resources, especially for patentable Ayush based formulations, 
phytopharmaceuticals as well as on isolation of lead compounds from plants and microbial 
sources. It is also involved in quality control and scientific validation of traditional claims of 
Ayush drugs and formulations including fingerprinting, quantification of markers, 
metabolomics, pharmacokinetics and network pharmacology approaches with advanced 
statistical tools such as principal component, big data analysis and heat map studies. 
Department has well established Plant Tissue Culture Laboratory for the enhanced production 
of secondary metabolites and very rich pharmaceutical biotechnology laboratory with state of 
the art facilities on microbial and fermentation technologies. Department is also enriched with 
the facilities like advanced microscopy involved in research for studies on herbal cosmetics, 
immunomodulatory, anti-obesity and anti-diabetic medicinal plants as well as the screening of 
new drug molecules, standardized herbal drugs/extracts/ fractions for their biological activities 
using in vitrocell culture, zebra fish and in vivo models. Futher, development of plant-based 
nano-structured formulations, isolation, identification, and characterization of natural 
compounds applying sophisticated statistical and analytical tools are the additional strength of 
the department. The department is supported by DST-FIST, UGC-SAP and AICTE MODROB 
programs in addition to the most prestigious Centre of Excellence from Ministry of Ayush. 
Department achieved a significant milestone by securing the top position in the field of 
Pharmacognosy in thein the Global Lifetime Ranking by ScholarGPS. Other than the funded 
projects, the departmental so has many sponsored consultancy projects from different 
pharmaceutical / herbal drug industries. 
 
ACADEMICSTAFF 
 
 
Dr. Vidhu Aeri, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Mohd Mujeeb, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Bibhu Prasad Panda, PhD, Professor & Head 
Dr. Sayeed Ahmad, PhD, Professor 
Dr. Showkat Rasool Mir, PhD, Professor  
Dr. Adil Ahamad, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Maths & Statistics 
Dr. Mohd Vaseem Ismail, PhD, Assistant Professor 
 
Centre of Excellence in Unani Medicine CoE (Pharmacognosy and Pharmacology) 
The Centre of Excellence in Unani Medicine CoE (Pharmacognosy and Pharmacology) is a state-of- 
the-art research facility as a part of Department of Pharmacognosy and Phytochemistry of School of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi, India. CoE is funded by the 
Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, and is dedicated for conducting a wide range of scientific 
investigations related to Traditional Unani Medicine. This initiative empowers to carry out advanced 
research on Unani Medicine and offers a range of facilities, including GC-MS with ECD, Head Space 
and Online Library, SCFE (Supercritical Fluid Extractor), Flash Chromatography, HPTLC (High- 
 
Performance 
Thin-Layer 
Chromatography), 
ICP-MS 
(Inductively 
Coupled 
Plasma 
Mass 
Spectrometry), LCMS, HPLC, DNA barcoding. Microscopic and Stability studies, Zebrafish Models, 
Fume Hoods, Cell CultureBSL-3 (Biosafety Level 3) Laboratory, Biosafety Cabinets, Laminar Flow 
Hood, extractors and evaporators/dryers including Lyophilizer, Rota evaporators, nitrovacetc with 
inhouse auditorium/training facility, software tools such as Biorender, Mass Fragmenter, XL-Stat, 
GraphPad Prism, software’s for in silico studies etc. 
 
 
Central Instrumentation Facility (CIF) 
 
The school has a well-established central instrumentation facility (CIF) having variety of modern and 
sophisticated instruments like Cryogenic Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM), LC-MS, NMR 
(400 MHz), HPLC, HPTLC, DSC, UV-Visible spectrophotometer, FT-IR etc. Facility for 
interdisciplinary research namely flow cytometry, confocal microscopy, western blot analysis and 
electrophoresis, wet lab synthesis, Microwave-assisted Organic Synthesis (MAOS) are also available. 
 
Overall, there is a strong research culture in all the above four departments with emphasis on 
quality of publications, Ph.D. theses and research projects. Research activities of all departments 
are well-funded by various agencies such as DST, DBT, ICMR, UGC, CCRUM, CCRAS etc. 
 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
  
 
Diploma in Pharmacy (D. Pharm.) 
 
Seats: 60 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have 
 
• 
Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, Chemistry and 
Biology or Mathematics from Central Board of Secondary Education or any other examination 
recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing at least 45% marks in the aggregate and 
also in the aggregate of Physics, Chemistry and Biology or Mathematics. 
 
• 
Completed the age of 17 years on or before 31st December 2024 as per PCI norms. 
 
Selection process: Admission to D. Pharm. Programme shall be made through merit of qualifying 
examination (10+2 PCB/PCM stream). 
 
Note: Allocation of seats for PCB/PCM stream candidates will depend upon the number of 
applications received under a category (PCB/PCM stream).
 
 
 
Bachelor of Pharmacy (B. Pharm.) 
 
Seats: 120 (60 General and 60 SFS, inclusive of seats reserved for NRI/Sponsored candidates. 
 
Additional seats are available for Foreign National candidates). 
 
Duration: 4 years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have: 
 
• 
Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, Chemistry and 
Biology/Mathematics from Central Board of Secondary Education or any other examination 
recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate and 
also in the aggregate of Physics, Chemistry and Biology/Mathematics. 
 
• 
Completed the age of 17 years on or before 31st December 2024 as per PCI norms. 
 
Selection process: 
 
• 
Appeared in NEET 2025/Paper-1 of JEE (Main) 2025. Selection will be based on merit in NEET 
2025/Paper-1 of JEE (Main) 2025. 
 
• 
Non-NEET/non-JEE candidates may also apply, however NEET-2025/JEE-2025 candidates will 
be preferred. Non-NEET/non-JEE applicants may be considered only if suitable number of NEET-
2025/ JEE-2025 candidates are not available. In case of delay in conduct of NEET-2025/JEE-2025 the 
University may take admissions on the basis of merit of aggregate percentage of first five subjects of 
the qualifying examination. 
 
• 
The candidates who studied both Maths and Biology in 12th Standard need to apply separately 
under JEE Main (2025) and NEET-2025 forms. Allocation of seats for NEET/JEE candidates will 
depend upon the number of applications received under a category (NEET/JEE or PCB/PCM stream). 
 
 
B. Pharm. II Year (Lateral entry) 
 
Seats: 12 
 
Duration: 3 Years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have: 
 
• 
Passed Diploma in Pharmacy examination of Jamia Hamdard or from any other recognized 
institution with 50% marks in the aggregate. 
 
• 
Passed 10+2 examination from CBSE or any other board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as 
equivalent thereto with PCB
 
Selection process: Admission to B. Pharm. II Year will be made on the basis of merit determined by 
marks obtained in D. Pharm. (all semesters/years). Candidates have to submit the result of the D. 
Pharm., preferably on or before the last date of submission of application form or as notified by the 
University. Preference will be given to candidates who have completed 500 hours practical training 
spread over a period of not less than 3 months. Candidate with result awaited may be offered 
admission only after submission of final result, if seats remain vacant. 
  
 
Master of Pharmacy (M. Pharm.) 
 
Seats: 77 
 
Duration: Two years (Four Semesters) 
 
Specialization and No. of seats: 
 
Specialization 
No. of Seats 
• M Pharm Pharmaceutics 
15 
• M Pharm Pharmacology 
15 
• M Pharm Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
10 
• M Pharm Pharmacognosy 
08 
• M Pharm Pharmacy Practice 
08 
• M Pharm Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance 
08 
• M Pharm Pharmaceutical Analysis 
08 
• M Pharm Pharmaceutical Biotechnology 
05 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have: 
 
• 
Passed B. Pharm. examination from an institution recognized by Jamia Hamdard and approved 
by PCI and securing at least 55% marks in the aggregate of theory papers and practical. 
 
• 
Preference will be given to GPAT qualified candidates. 
 
• 
For consideration under the Sponsored category, candidates should have a two-year full time 
work experience in a registered firm/industry/educational institution. If experienced candidates are not 
available, consideration to fresh candidates may be given. 
 
Selection process: The admission to the M. Pharm. Programme will be offered on the basis of merit 
of GPAT qualified candidates. If sufficient numbers of GPAT qualified candidates are not available, 
admission will be subsequently offered on the basis of B. Pharm. percentage. Admission under 
NRI/Sponsored category candidates will also be made on the basis of B. Pharm. percentage. 
 
Important note: Scholarships may be available for M. Pharm. students (GPAT qualified) through UGC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. programs offered in following disciplines: 
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. program from session 2025-26 will be released later. 
 
• 
Pharmaceutics 
 
• 
Pharmacognosy & Phytochemistry 
 
• 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry 
 
• 
Pharmacology 
 
• 
Pharmaceutics with specialization in Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance 
 
• 
Pharmacognosy & Phytochemistry with specialization in Pharmaceutical Biotechnology 
 
• 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry with specialization in Pharmaceutical Analysis 
 
• 
Pharmacology with specialization in Pharmacy Practice 
 
Eligibility: M. Pharm. in the relevant specialties/subject as given in Appendix A of Gazette 
notification of PCI dated 10thDec 2014 and Pharm D only for admission to Ph.D. in Pharmacology 
with specialization in Pharmacy Practice securing at least 55% marks in the aggregate or equivalent 
grade from Jamia Hamdard or from any other institution, recognized by PCI/AIU and Jamia 
Hamdard. 
  
Ph.D. (Pharmaceutical Medicine) 
 
The notification for admission to the PhD program from session 2025-26 will be released in April 
2025. 
 
Eligibility: M. Pharm. in Pharmacology/Hospital Pharmacy/Clinical Pharmacy/Pharmaceutics or 
MBBS degree securing at least 55% marks in the aggregate or equivalent grade from Jamia Hamdard 
or from any other institution, recognized by PCI/AIU and Jamia Hamdard. Preference will be given to 
MD/DNB degree holders in Pharmacology/Medicine/Clinical Pharmacology. 
 
Two seats are reserved for Pharmaceutical Industry nominated candidates, one under General and one 
under SFS category. 
 
Note: GPAT/NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission 
in Ph.D. programs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SCHOOL OF NURSING SCIENCES AND 
 
ALLIED HEALTH 
 
(SNSAH) 
 
Dean: Prof. Shakir Ali 
 
The School of Nursing Sciences and Allied Health (SNSAH) offers programs in the disciplines of 
Nursing Sciences and Allied Health Sciences, including both the UG, PG, and doctoral programs of 
study in Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy, and Paramedical Sciences. The school has a 
College of Nursing, and three Departments (Occupational Therapy, Physiotherapy, and Paramedical 
Sciences), and a Clinical facility for Occupational Therapy (OT) and Physiotherapy (PT), the 
Rehabilitation Centre – OT and PT managed by a Superintendent (OT) and Superintendent (PT). 
 
1. Rufaida College of Nursing (RCN) 
2. Department of Occupational Therapy (DOT) 
3. Department of Physiotherapy (DPT) 
4. Department of Paramedical Sciences (DPS), and  
5. Rehabilitation Centre 
 
SNSAH is one of the largest and most dynamic schools of Jamia Hamdard. Various programs offered 
by the school are recognized by one or another statutory body, namely DCPTOT, INC, or fall under the 
purview of the National Commission for Allied Healthcare Professions. The school is supported by a 
720 bedded hospital. Students are also sent to various other Govt. hospitals in Delhi NCR and other 
tertiary care hospitals for internship. 
 
In house labs and clinics, classrooms and other facilities meet all the requirements of regulatory bodies 
and above. Teachers are skilled and well trained. Students are placed both in India and across the globe 
and the placement record is 100%. 
 
 
 
RUFAIDA COLLEGE OF NURSING 
 
Principal: Prof. Veena Sharma 
 
Nursing is a profession within the health care sector, focused on the care of individuals, families, 
and communities. Nurses constitute the largest workforce in any healthcare setting and during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, its importance was accepted by the world and duly endorsed by WHO by 
declaring the year 2020 as the “Year of the Nurse and Midwife”. The nurses practice in a wide 
range of settings like hospitals, rural & urban community health centers, schools, NGOs, academic 
institutes, etc., enhancing the scope of practice of this noble profession. The changing patient needs 
and expectations in 21st century continue to influence the emerging advanced nursing role in 
coming decades, which requires the quality nursing care through dynamic education and research. 
 
 
The erstwhile Rufaida School of Nursing, now Rufaida College of Nursing, was established in 
1983 as per the vision of Janab Hakeem Abdul Hameed Saheb, the founder of Jamia Hamdard, 
who wanted to encourage girls from Muslim minority community and weaker sections of the 
society to take up this noble profession of nursing. Rufaida College of Nursing has completed 42 
years of its existence with commendable achievements in the field of nursing education. We 
initially started with Diploma in General Nursing and Midwifery program, and later in 1994, 2008, 
2013 and 2014, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing, M.Sc. Nursing, Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing and Ph.D. in 
Nursing were started, respectively. With the motto “Par excellence in preparing competent nurse 
professionals”, the College of Nursing has been working towards the achievement of following 
goals, ever since its inception: 
 
 
● Provide quality education and training to student nurses at the undergraduate, post-graduate and 
doctoral levels. 
● Participate in health care delivery system of India in promotion of health, prevention of illness, 
care of sick, restoration of health and rehabilitation. 
 
The courses offered are recognized by the Indian Nursing Council (INC) and the State Nursing 
Council–Delhi Nursing Council (DNC). The students are given rich clinical, ‘hands-on’ training in 
the parent hospital i.e. Hakeem Abdul Hameed Centenary Hospital (HAHC) and other affiliated 
hospitals, such as Safdarjung Hospital, VIMHANS, IHBAS, rural and urban health centers, run by 
M.C.D. and Jamia Hamdard. To make students aware of their social responsibilities and 
obligations, they are involved in various community extension activities for their all-round 
development. 
 
The college has state-of-the art infrastructure and excellent learning resources and research 
facilities. The college has its own building with upgraded simulation lab and well-maintained 
library. 
 
The students and teachers have been continuously involved in various research projects and 
community service activities, such as conduction of mass health education projects, free health 
camps, health melas etc. The successful graduates of the programs get 100% employment in 
leading 
hospitals 
and 
healthcare 
institutions, 
in 
India 
and 
abroad. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Prof. Veena Sharma, Principal, M. Phil  
Prof. Seema Rani, Vice–Principal, M. Phil 
Prof. Manju Chhugani, Professor, Ph.D.  
Ms. Bindu Shaiju, Associate Professor, Master of Nursing 
Ms. Jamal Fatima Hashmi, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Mikki, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Somibala Thokchom, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Fareha Khan, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Jahanara Rahman, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Neha John, Assistant Professor, Master of Nursing 
Dr. Shilpi Sarkar, Assistant Professor, Ph.D.  
Ms. Saba Hashmi, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Anjali Kaushik, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Sartaj Parveen, Assistant Professor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Hemlatha Nair, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
 
 
Ms. Nahid Zebi, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Rajlaxmi, Tutor, Master of Nursing 
Ms. Maihnaz Bi, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Shaheen Khan, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. K. Rebika Devi, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Gifty Bijoy, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Deepali Gupta, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Sweta Mary Jacob, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Suchhanda Bhattacharya, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Uzma Anjum, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Rashmi, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Vandana Dagar, Tutor, Master of Nursing 
Ms. Saliqua Sehar, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Preysi, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Renu, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Anju, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Nazni, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Vijeeta Lal, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Farheen Khan, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Bandhu Sharma, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Deepika Kumari, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Nargis Khatoon, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Uzma Viquar, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Mr. Imran Ahmed, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Asha Sharma, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Anamika Dewan, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Sumathi, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Zeba Bano, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Anuradha, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Parul, Tutor, M.Sc. Nursing 
Ms. Asma Zia, Tutor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
Ms. Prabhdeep Kaur, Tutor, Master of Nursing 
Mr. Mohammad Arif, Clinical Instructor, B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
 Ms. Sabiha Fatima, Clinical Instructor, P.B.B.Sc. Nursing 
 Ms. Sofiya Fatima, Clinical Instructor, P.B.B.Sc. Nursing 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection Process 
 
 
1. Diploma in General Nursing and Midwifery (DGNM) 
 
 
Seats: 70 (Inclusive of foreign nationals/NRIs) 
 
Duration: 3 years 
 
Eligibility: 
 
● 10+2 with English and must have obtained a minimum of 40% at the qualifying 
examination and have passed English individually from any board recognized by Jamia 
Hamdard. Candidates from State Open School recognized by State Government and 
National Institute of Open School (NIOS) recognized by Central Government are also 
eligible. However, Science is preferable. 
 
● 10+2 with English having 40% of marks in vocational ANM course from the school 
recognized by Indian Nursing Council. 
● 10+2 with English having 40% of marks in vocational stream-Health Care Science from 
a recognized CBSE board/State/Centre. 
● Registered ANM with pass marks. 
● Candidate must have passed in any five subjects including English out of which three 
subjects should be from the list given by DNC as below: 
 
The subjects for admission to DGNM are (a) Physics (b) Chemistry (c) Biology (d) 
Mathematics 
(e) Commerce (f) Accountancy (g) Economics (h) Business Studies (i) Computer 
Science/Informatics Practice/Word processing/Multimedia (j) Geography (k) History (l) 
Civics (m) Sociology (n) Psychology (o) Political Science (p) Home Science. 
 
 
● Candidate must have passed in all the subjects of 10+2 (five subjects as per the CBSE 
policy). 
● Candidate should be able to communicate in English. 
● Candidate should be medically fit. 
● Completed the age of 17 years on or before 31st December 2024. 
 
Selection process: Admission to DGNM shall be made based on the merit of the qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
 
 
Seats: 60 (Inclusive of foreign nationals/NRIs). 
 
Duration: 4 years 
 
Eligibility: 
 
 
● Completed the age of 17 years on or before 31st December 2025 as per INC norms. 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry, Biology and English from Central Board of Secondary Education or any 
other examination board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing 
at least 45% marks in the aggregate and also in the aggregate of Physics, Chemistry and 
Biology. Student must have passed in all the subjects of 12th standard including English 
(Five subjects as per C.B.S.E. policy). 
● Candidates from State Open School recognized by State Government and National 
Institute of Open School (NIOS) recognized by Central Government having Science 
subjects and English only are also eligible. 
● Candidate should be able to communicate in English. 
● Candidate should be medically fit. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be made on the basis of merit based on score in NEET 
2025, from among the candidates, who apply for the program through online Jamia Hamdard 
Admission Portal. 
 
 
 
0. Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Seats: 30 (Inclusive of foreign nationals/NRIs) 
 
Duration: 2 years 
 
Eligibility: 
 
 
● DGNM qualification from Nursing School/College recognized by Indian Nursing Council 
● Registered as RN (Registered Nurse) and RM (Registered Midwife) under State Nursing 
Council 
● Candidate should be able to communicate in English. 
● Candidate should be medically fit. 
 
Selection process: The applicant for Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing program shall either have to 
appear in the Entrance Test conducted by Jamia Hamdard or will be selected on the basis of 
merit of the qualifying examination depending upon the directives of the Nursing Council. 
In case Entrance Test is conducted, the questions will be based on DGNM syllabus as per 
INC. 
 
 
0. M.Sc. Nursing 
 
 
Seats: 25 (Inclusive of foreign nationals/NRIs). 
 
Specializations 
No. of Seats 
M.Sc. Medical Surgical Nursing 
06 
M.Sc. Obstetrics & Gynecological Nursing 
06 
M.Sc. Mental Health (Psychiatric) Nursing 
06 
M.Sc. Community Health Nursing 
05 
M.Sc. Child Health (Pediatric) Nursing 
02 
 
Duration: 2 years 
 
Eligibility:  
 
 
● Passed B.Sc. Nursing/B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing/Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing with minimum 
of 55% marks in aggregate from an institution recognized by Indian Nursing Council. 
● A Registered Nurse and Registered Midwife or equivalent with any State Nursing 
Registration Council. 
● Minimum one year of work experience in nursing field prior to or after Post Basic B.Sc. 
Nursing or after B.Sc. Nursing, after registration with the State Nursing Registration 
Council. 
 
Selection process: Based on the merit of the qualifying examination. 
 
GENERAL NOTE FOR ALL UG, PG AND DIPLOMA NURSING STUDENTS: 
 
 
 
● Stay in the hostel is recommended for all nursing students. Hostel accommodation is 
provided on payment of prescribed charges. 
● For admission against the Foreign National/NRI/Sponsored seats, wherever 
applicable, written test is not required. 
● Transport Fee: Rs. 5,000/- per year needs to be paid by the DGNM and B.Sc. (Hons.) 
Nursing students. 
● Clinical Affiliation Fee needs to be paid by all the nursing students as and when 
applicable 
● Students need to pay the Tuition Fee within 10 days of the commencement of the new 
semester/year.  
● For annual courses namely DGNM & Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing; 1st installment should 
be paid in July/August & 2nd installment in January.  
● Uniform fee as applicable will be charged at the time of admission.  
 
 
0. Ph.D. in Nursing 
 
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. for the session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility: 
 
 
● M.Sc. Nursing or a Post Graduate degree in Nursing or M.Phil. Nursing recognized 
by INC with a minimum of 60% marks in M.Sc. Nursing. 
● Three years teaching or clinical experience after M.Sc. Nursing. 
 
Selection process: 
 
 
● Selection for the Ph.D. in Nursing will be based on merit of entrance test and interview 
conducted by Jamia Hamdard. 
● Candidates in service shall forward application along with the No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Head of the institution, where the candidate is working. 
● PhD Ordinance, 2021 will be followed for all PhD related matters. 
 
 
Department of Occupational Therapy 
Head of the Department: Dr. Rashida Begum 
 
The Department of Occupational Therapy is dedicated to excellence in education, research, and clinical 
practice, preparing students to become skilled professionals in the field of rehabilitation and healthcare. 
The department offers a comprehensive academic pathway, including the Bachelor of Occupational 
Therapy (BOT), Master of Occupational Therapy (MOT), and Ph.D. in Occupational Therapy, each 
designed to equip students with advanced knowledge, practical skills, and research expertise. The 
Department of Occupational Therapy, formerly a part of the Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, has 
been offering postgraduate and undergraduate programs in Occupational Therapy since 2000 and 2001, 
respectively. The Ph.D. program in Rehabilitation Science was introduced in 2017, subsequently; the 
Ph.D. program in Occupational Therapy was introduced in 2023. Recently in the year 2024, the 
Department of Occupational Therapy won the Eminent College of Occupational Therapy in Delhi 
NCR.  
 
 
The academic programs have been recognized by the Delhi Council of Physiotherapy & Occupational 
Therapy (DCPTOT) and the All-India Occupational Therapists’ Association (AIOTA). These programs 
are designed in alignment with national and international professional standards. With a strong focus on 
holistic patient care and evidence-based practice, our programs integrate theoretical learning with 
hands-on clinical training. Students gain invaluable experience through our state-of-the-art 
Rehabilitation Center, catering to individuals with diverse therapeutic needs. The center provides 
students with the opportunity to work alongside experienced professionals, apply their knowledge in 
real-world settings, and contribute to improving the quality of life for patients. The students are also 
posted for clinical exposure and internship in Government and private hospitals, NGOs & special 
schools across Delhi & NCR. 
 
Occupational therapy is a holistic, evidence-based, and client-centered profession that serves as both a 
primary point of contact and a referred service within the modern healthcare system. It addresses 
functional impairments resulting from physical, psychological, or cognitive conditions, developmental 
disorders, or the aging process—factors that can significantly impact quality of life. The scope of 
occupational therapy extends to multiple specialties, including Pediatrics, Musculoskeletal, 
Neurological, Mental Health and Psychosocial, Geriatrics and Aging Care, Hand Therapy, Community-
Based Rehabilitation (CBR) and Public Health, Industrial and Workplace Ergonomics, Assistive 
Technology and Rehabilitation Engineering, Oncology, and Palliative Care. With its holistic and client-
centered approach, occupational therapy continues to expand its reach, empowering individuals to 
achieve meaningful participation in daily life and improving overall quality of life across various 
healthcare settings.  
 
Graduates and post graduates of this program have diverse career opportunities in both traditional and 
non-traditional settings. They may secure placements in hospitals, rehabilitation centers, special 
schools, industrial medical facilities, and de-addiction centers. Additionally, they can pursue careers in 
educational institutions as academicians and/or researchers, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), 
or establish their own private practice. 
 
Our alumni have achieved a 100% placement rate and are contributing to various esteemed hospitals, 
including LN Hospital, GB Pant Hospital, Kalawati Saran Children’s Hospital, ESI Hospital, 
PDDUNIPPD, and Sir Ganga Ram Hospital. Several graduates have successfully established their own 
ventures as entrepreneurs, while others have secured stable careers across different states in India. 
Additionally, many alumni have pursued higher education and employment opportunities abroad, 
serving in countries such as the USA, England, Ireland, the UAE, Singapore, the Republic of Congo, 
Australia, and Canada. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Name 
Designation 
 
Prof. Ruchi Nagar Buckshee (OT), MOT 
Professor 
Dr. Rashida Begum (OT), MOT 
Head & Associate Professor 
Dr. Shubha Arora (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Noor Mohammad (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nazia Ali (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Saba Aziz (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Saba Irem (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shivani Bhardwaj (OT), MOT & PhD 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Subhav Sharma (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Saqueba Shahi (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nikhat Sultana (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Firdous Mohammad Ikram (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sidra Arshad (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Bhavita (OT), MOT 
Assistant Professor 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
 
1. Bachelor of Occupational Therapy (BOT)   
 
 
Seats: 50 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates) 
Duration: Four years plus compulsory internship of six months 
 
Eligibility: 
 
Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, Chemistry 
and Biology from Central Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized 
by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate and also 
in the aggregate of Physics, Chemistry and Biology. 
 
Selection process: The selection will be based on the 10+2 Merit among the candidates, who 
apply for admission to BOT program through Jamia Hamdard Online Admission Portal 
 
 
0. Master of Occupational Therapy (MOT) 
 
 
Seats: (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates) 
 
Specialization 
No of seats 
Musculoskeletal 06 
Paediatrics 
06 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
 
Eligibility:  
 
● Bachelor of Occupational therapy (BOT) from an institution recognized by Jamia 
Hamdard /Institute approved by the UGC, securing at least 50% marks in aggregate. 
The BOT program should be recognized by Delhi Council of Physiotherapy and 
Occupational therapy. 
 
● Candidates who have obtained degree in BOT from distant mode are not eligible for 
Post Graduate courses in Occupational Therapy. 
 
Selection process: The selection will be based on the entrance test conducted by Jamia 
Hamdard. The question paper will comprise of questions on basic sciences and occupational 
therapy subjects taught at BOT level. 
 
 
0. Ph.D. Occupational Therapy 
 
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. for the session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility:  
 
 
● Master of Occupational therapy with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the UGC. 
 
Selection process: 
 
 
● Selection for the Ph.D. Occupational Therapy will be based on merit of entrance test 
and interview conducted by Jamia Hamdard. NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship 
holders/Project Fellows will be given preference in PhD admission. 
● Candidates in service shall forward application along with the No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Head of the Institution, where the candidate is working. 
● PhD Ordinance, 2021 will be followed in for all PhD related matters. 
 
Department of Physiotherapy 
Head of the Department: Prof. Sohrab A. Khan 
 
The Department of Physiotherapy, erstwhile a part of the Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, 
established in 1998 with the commencement of the Postgraduate program, and the undergraduate 
program was introduced in the year 2001. The department is offering PhD in Physiotherapy from 
2017. Physiotherapy, according to World Physiotherapy, is a healthcare discipline that focuses on 
optimising physical potential, human function, and mobility. In physiotherapy, patients/clients, 
other medical professionals, families, care givers, and communities engage in a process wherein 
the physiotherapist use their expertise to examine/assess the patient's mobility and establish 
objectives for treatment. Physiotherapy as a discipline ensures overall wellbeing of patient/client 
considering social, psychological, emotional, and physical health. Taking into consideration 
variances in health condition, physical therapy utilizes physical ways like exercise therapy and 
electrotherapy to maintain, and restore physical, psychological, and social well-being. It is a 
scientific discipline and is dedicated to extending, applying, evaluating and reviewing the 
evidence that supports and guides physiotherapy practice.  The exercise of clinical judgement and 
informed interpretation is at its core. 
 
The scope of Physiotherapy covers a wide spectrum of disorders in Orthopedics, Neurology, 
Cardiopulmonary, Sports, Hand Rehabilitation, Community Based Rehabilitation, Obstetrics, 
Gynecology, Geriatrics, Pediatrics & Women’s health. In addition to clinical practice, 
Physiotherapists have an equally vital role in academic & research activities and play a pivotal role  
 
in the preventive health. The major contribution of Physiotherapy is in strengthening the medical 
and health services by being one of the major pillars of the health care sciences and providing 
better quality to human healthcare along with adding to the longevity of human life. 
 
The department is committed to shape the students into competent professionals who are poised to 
take up professional opportunities in academic career of teaching and research in India and abroad, 
and as Physiotherapists in reputed Hospitals, Clinics, NGOs, Fitness Centers, Community Health 
Centers, Rehabilitation Centers and Sports Teams or can continue with own private practice. 
Alumni have secured positions in both government and private sectors, reflecting the department's 
dedication to student success. Many of our alumni are successfully placed in different government 
and private Hospitals/Institutes such as Govt Hospitals of different states of India, AIIMS, RML, 
LNJP, G.B. Pant, Railway Hospital, Apollo Group of Institutions, PDUNIPPD, VIMHANS, 
Safdarjung, Medanta etc. within the country and abroad including U.K., USA, Hongkong, 
Singapore, Canada, Denmark, Australia, Republic of Congo, Nepal, Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 
New Zealand, etc. ,covering the major countries of the world. Many students are also working on 
various academic positions in reputed State and Central Universities such as Jamia Milia Islamia, 
Delhi University, Guru Gobind Singh Indraprastha University, Integral University etc. 
 
The Department of Physiotherapy offers postgraduate programs in four specialized streams: MPT 
(Cardiopulmonary), MPT (Musculoskeletal), MPT (Neurology) and MPT (Sports). These 
programs provide advanced clinical training, research opportunities, and hands-on experience to 
develop expertise in patient care. Graduates are equipped with specialized skills to excel in 
healthcare, rehabilitation, and sports training & rehabilitation fields. The academic programs are 
recognized by the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy & Occupational Therapy and various National 
and International professional bodies. 
 
The Department is fully developed with highly qualified, competent professional faculty to provide 
much needed practical training to the students of undergraduate and postgraduate courses so as to 
enable relief to the patients with competence and full confidence. The Department is fully equipped 
with the Postgraduate Research labs for specialties Cardiopulmonary, Musculoskeletal, Neurology 
Sports and Electrotherapy, Exercise-Therapy and Sports and Exercise Research labs. The 
Department has a Physiotherapy OPD located in the university campus in which students are 
exposed to different types of clinical cases. It is equipped with the state of art equipment to assess 
and treat patients with different clinical conditions thereby, making the students well aware about 
the recent trends in clinical practice and helping the teachers impart knowledge in an empirical 
manner. The Department of Physiotherapy has signed agreements/MoU with reputed hospitals like 
Madan Mohan Malviya Hospital, Aggarwal Hospital (Pitampura), Hindu Rao Hospital and 
Universities like University of Science and Technology, Meghalaya. The students are provided 
exposure during clinical training and internship opportunities in various hospitals such as Max 
Saket, Apollo Hospital, Vimhans, Sitaram Bharti institute of Medical Sciences and Research, Dr. 
Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lok Nayak Hospital and placement as trainee physiotherapists with 
various sports teams and National and International level sporting events. The Department of 
Physiotherapy firmly believes in the values that are most relevant to the health of the community 
and professional integrity. To make students aware of their social responsibilities many community 
extension activities like health awareness and checkup camps are organized by the Department. 
Various health centers and healthcare agencies visit the Department for Undergraduate and 
Postgraduate placements every year. The Department has also received funds for Research Projects 
by funding agencies such as Indian Council of Medical Education and Research (ICMR), UGC and 
Performance Health, USA. 
 
 
 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
 
Prof. (Dr.) Sohrab A. Khan, MPT & PhD  
 
- 
Professor and Head 
Dr. Nishat Quddus (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Associate Professor 
Dr. Kalpana Zutshi (PT), MPT   
 
 
- 
Associate Professor  
Dr. Jyoti Ganai (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Deepak Malhotra (PT), MPT  
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor  
Dr. Zuheb A. Siddiqui (PT), MPT 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Hammad A. Siddiqui (PT), MPT 
 
 
-    
 Assistant Professor  
Dr. Prachi Tiwari (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
-           Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nahid Khan (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor  
Dr. Deepika Singla, MPT & PhD 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor  
Dr. Sahar Zaidi (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor  
Dr. Huma Khan (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Charu Chhabra (PT), MPT  
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shaima Saifi (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Ifra Aman (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
 Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sujata Jha, MPT 
 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md Farhan Alam (PT), MPT  
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Aatika Khan (PT), MPT 
 
 
 
- 
Assistant Professor 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
 
1. Bachelor of Physiotherapy (BPT)   
 
 
Seats: 50 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates) 
Duration: Four years plus compulsory internship of six months 
 
Eligibility: Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with 
Physics, Chemistry and Biology from Central Board of Secondary Education or any other 
examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto securing at least 50% 
marks in the aggregate and also in the aggregate of Physics, Chemistry and Biology. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit through NEET 2025 from among 
the candidates who applied for admission to BPT through Jamia Hamdard admission 
portal. Non- NEET candidates may also apply. Although NEET candidates will be 
preferred, non-NEET applicants may be considered on the basis of merit of first 5 subjects 
in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. Master of Physiotherapy (MPT) 
 
 
Seats: 21 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates) 
 
Specialization 
 No of Seats 
Cardiopulmonary 
5 
Musculoskeletal 
6 
Neurology 
5 
Sports 
5 
 
 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have: 
 
 
● Bachelor of Physiotherapy (B.P.T.) from an institution recognized by Jamia Hamdard or 
University/Institute approved by the UGC, securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate. 
The BPT course should be recognized by the Delhi Council for Physiotherapy and 
Occupational therapy. 
● Candidates who have obtained degree in B.P.T. from distant mode are not eligible for 
Post Graduate courses in Physiotherapy. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the Entrance Test conducted by Jamia 
Hamdard. The question paper will comprise of questions on basic sciences and physiotherapy 
subjects taught at BPT level. 
 
 
0. Ph.D. Physiotherapy 
 
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. for the session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility:  
 
 
● Master of Physiotherapy with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate 
from any University/Institution recognized by the UGC. 
 
Selection process: 
 
 
● Selection for the PhD Physiotherapy will be based on merit of entrance test and 
interview conducted by Jamia Hamdard. NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship 
holders/Project Fellows will be given preference in PhD admission. 
● Candidates in service shall forward application along with the No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Head of the Institution, where the candidate is working. 
● PhD Ordinance, 2021 will be followed in for all PhD related matters. 
 
 
Department of Paramedical Sciences 
Head of the Department: Prof. Sohrab A. Khan 
 
Department of Paramedical Sciences was established in 2005 with an aim to provide skilled 
paramedical healthcare professionals for healthcare sector. Since it inception, the department has 
been preparing students for real-life medical scenarios by offering multiple Undergraduate and 
Postgraduate programs including Medical Laboratory Sciences, Medical Imaging Technology & 
Optometry along with new trending programs like Anesthesia & Operation Theatre Technology, 
Dialysis Technology, Cardiology Laboratory and Emergency & Trauma Care Technology. 
 
The demand for paramedical staff is increasing massively with huge number of openings released 
every year in Central hospitals of the country like AIIMS, PGIMER, ESIC as well as various 
GMCs of different states/UTs etc. Also leading corporate hospitals like MAX Healthcare, Fortis,  
 
Apollo etc. are also having a huge demand of paramedics and are consistently hiring them. 
National Allied Health Council has also been framed and will be applicable to all the courses of 
Paramedical Sciences and it will boost the demand of Paramedical professionals in hospitals, 
colleges, and universities. Post-graduation further increases the scope to academic & research 
fields for paramedical students. There is a global demand for paramedic graduates to work in 
health care facilities and students have got placed abroad as well in countries like UK, USA, 
Canada, Australia and Gulf countries. Also, after the establishment of regulations of National 
Allied Health Council, the hospitals, universities, and other concerned organizations will be 
required to recruit only registered Paramedical staff for hospital and well as teaching positions.  
 
Over more than a decade, many batches have graduated and post graduated from the Department 
and today the Department of Paramedical Sciences attracts students from all over the country and 
abroad. The Vision of Paramedical Department is to provide high quality skilled students and 
competent professionals to provide better medical services and enhance their employability & to 
meet the international standards. It also aims to carry out research that advances the state-of-the-art 
services in Paramedical & Allied Health Sciences. Department has also signed agreements/MoU 
with 13 state of art hospitals to provide clinical exposure to all students like Madan Mohan 
Malviya Hospital, Max Saket, Apollo Hospital, Dr. Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lok Nayak 
Hospital, GB Pant Hospital etc. The successful graduate & postgraduate candidates are 100% 
employed immediately after getting passed from the University in leading hospitals and academic 
healthcare institutions across the country and abroad. Recently, in 2024, the department has also 
introduced PhD. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Dr. Sohrab A. Khan, Professor & Head  
Dr. Sharmin Siddiqui, Assistant Professor (Medical Lab Sciences) 
Dr. Ashar Imam, MBBS, Assistant Professor (Anatomy) 
Dr. Mohd Hashim Khan, Assistant Professor (Medical Lab Sciences) 
Mr. Sheikh Mohammad Irfan, Assistant Professor (Anesthesia & Operation Theatre Technology) 
Ms. Nargis Khatun, Clinical Instructor (Dialysis Technology) 
Ms. Nida, Clinical Instructor (Optometry) 
Ms. Aaliya Khan, Clinical Instructor (Dialysis Technology) 
Ms. Aleena Faheem, Clinical Instructor (Medical Lab Sciences) 
Ms. Sumaira Ahmed, Clinical Instructor (Medical Lab Sciences) 
Mr. Mohd. Afzal, Clinical Instructor (Medical Lab Sciences) 
Ms. Hina Falahee, Clinical Instructor (Optometry) 
Ms. Iqra Khan, Clinical Instructor (Emergency & Trauma care Technology) 
Mr. Mohd. Abdullah Siddiqui, Clinical Instructor (Medical Imaging Technology) 
Ms. Taiba, Clinical Instructor (Medical Imaging Technology) 
Ms. Ruqayya Saifi, Clinical Instructor (Optometry) 
Mr. Mohammad Mahtab, Clinical Instructor (Anesthesia & Operation Theatre Technology) 
Ms. Ayesha Sadqua, Clinical instructor (Optometry) 
Ms. Aleena Syed, Clinical Instructor (Medical Imaging Technology) 
Mr. Danish Bashir, Clinical Instructor (Dialysis Technology) 
Ms. Gulafsha, Clinical Instructor (Cardiology Laboratory Technology) 
Mr. Rehbar Khan, Clinical Instructor (Emergency & Trauma care Technology) 
Mr. Syed Nazar Raza, Clinical Instructor (Cardiology Laboratory Technology) 
Mr. Hemant Kumar, Clinical Instructor (Anesthesia & Operation Theatre Technology 
Mr. Moinul Haque, Laboratory Assistant  
 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility, and Selection Process 
 
 
1. B.Sc. Medical Laboratory Technology (BMLT) 
 
Course Introduction: BSc in Medical Laboratory Sciences/Technology is an undergraduate 
program that trains students to work in clinical laboratories. The program focuses on imparting 
relevant knowledge in subjects like Microbiology, Biochemistry, Haematology, Immunology, 
and Molecular Biology, preparing students to perform diagnostic tests that aid in disease 
detection, treatment, and prevention. 
Scope: Graduates can work as medical laboratory technicians, performing diagnostic tests in 
hospitals, clinics, and research labs etc. Career opportunities also include roles in clinical 
research, quality control, and health safety. With the growing demand for healthcare 
professionals, the scope for BMLT graduates is vast and offers a stable, rewarding career path. 
Seats: 60 (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals) 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central Board of 
Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent 
thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/ aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
LATERAL ENTRY: 
Seats: 8 seats (excluding of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals). 
Duration: 2 Years (Four semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: A candidate must have passed a two-year Diploma in Medical Laboratory 
Technology or equivalent in regular mode after 12th from science stream or 3-year regular 
Diploma after 10th examination with 50% marks in aggregate and recognized by Jamia 
Hamdard. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Medical Imaging Technology (BMIT) 
 
Course Introduction: BSc in Medical Imaging Technology is an undergraduate program that 
focuses on training students to use advanced imaging equipment to diagnose medical 
conditions. The curriculum covers subjects like Radiology, Ultrasound, CT scans, MRI, and 
Nuclear Medicine, preparing students to assist healthcare professionals in capturing and 
analysing diagnostic images. 
Scope: Graduates can work as Radiographers, Sonographers, or Medical Imaging Technologists 
in hospitals, diagnostic centres, and research institutions. They can also pursue careers in 
medical imaging equipment sales, teaching, or clinical research. With the increasing reliance on 
imaging for medical diagnosis, the demand for skilled professionals in this field is growing, 
offering strong career prospects. 
 
 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals) 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from 
Central Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia 
Hamdard as equivalent thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
LATERAL ENTRY: 
Seats: 8 seats (excluding of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals) 
Duration2 Years (Four semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship  
Eligibility: 
● A candidate must have passed a two-year Diploma in Medical Imaging 
Technology/Diploma in X-ray & ECG or equivalent in regular mode after 12th from 
science stream or 3-year regular Diploma after 10th examination with 50% marks in 
aggregate and recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Anesthesia and Operation Theatre Technology (BAOTT) 
 
Course Introduction: BSc in Anesthesia and Operation Theatre Technology is an undergraduate 
program designed to train students in the techniques and technologies used in Anesthesia administration 
and operation theatre procedures. The curriculum includes subjects like Anesthesia techniques, patient 
monitoring, surgical instrumentation, and sterilization, preparing students to assist Anaesthesiologists 
and surgeons during surgeries. 
Scope: Graduates can work as Anesthesia Technicians, Operation Theatre Technicians, or surgical 
Assistants in hospitals, surgical centres, and clinics. They may also have opportunities in medical 
equipment management, teaching, or research. With the increasing number of surgeries performed 
globally, skilled professionals in this field are in high demand, offering stable and rewarding career 
prospects. 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals). 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● 
Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, Chemistry 
and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central Board of 
Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent 
thereto. 
 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
LATERAL ENTRY: 
Seats: 8 seats (excluding of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals). 
Duration: 2 Years (Four semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● 
A candidate must have passed a two-year Diploma in Operation Theatre Technology/Diploma in 
Anesthesia Technology or equivalent in regular mode after 12th from science stream or 3-year 
regular Diploma after 10th examination with 50% marks in aggregate and recognized by Jamia 
Hamdard. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Emergency and Trauma Care Technology (ECCT) 
 
Course Introduction: BSc in Emergency & Trauma Care Technology is an undergraduate 
program that equips students with the skills and knowledge to handle medical emergencies and 
trauma care. The curriculum includes subjects such as Emergency Medicine, Triage, Trauma 
Management, Patient Assessment, Life Support Systems, and Emergency Medical Services, etc. 
preparing students to provide critical care in emergency situations. 
Scope: Graduates can work as Emergency Care Technicians, Trauma Care Specialists, or 
Paramedics in hospitals, emergency departments, ambulance services, and trauma centres. They 
may also find opportunities in disaster management, teaching, or in emergency medical 
equipment sales and maintenance. With the growing need for skilled professionals in urgent and 
life-threatening situations, there is a strong demand for emergency and trauma care technicians, 
offering diverse and stable career prospects in the healthcare sector. 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals). 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central 
Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
as equivalent thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Optometry (BOPT) 
 
 
Course Introduction: Bachelor of Optometry is an undergraduate program focused on the study of eye 
care, vision science, and the diagnosis and treatment of various eye conditions. The curriculum covers 
subjects such as optics, anatomy of the eye, visual perception, ocular diseases, and contact lens fitting 
etc. preparing students to provide comprehensive eye care and vision correction. 
 
Scope: Graduates can work as Optometrists, diagnosing and treating refractive errors, managing 
eye diseases, and providing vision therapy in hospitals, optical clinics, and vision centres. They 
can also pursue careers in research, teaching, or work with eyewear and contact lens companies. 
With growing awareness of eye health and vision care, the demand for optometrists is increasing 
globally, ensuring strong career opportunities in the field. 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals). 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central 
Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
as equivalent thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
LATERAL ENTRY: 
Seats: 8 seats (excluding of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals). 
Duration: 2 Years (Four semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● A candidate must have passed a two-year Diploma in Optometry or equivalent in regular 
mode after 12th from science stream or 3-year regular Diploma after 10th examination with 
50% marks in aggregate and recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Cardiology Laboratory Technology (CLT) 
 
Course Introduction: BSc in Cardiology Laboratory Technology is an undergraduate program 
that focuses on training students in the diagnostic techniques and technologies used to assess 
heart health. The curriculum covers subjects such as Cardiology, Electrocardiography (ECG), 
Echocardiography, Stress Testing, and Cardiac Catheterization, etc. preparing students to assist 
in diagnosing, monitoring and management of cardiovascular diseases. 
Scope: Graduates can work as Cardiology Lab Technicians (Cath Lab Technicians), performing 
diagnostic tests in hospitals, cardiology clinics, and diagnostic centres. They may also pursue 
careers in research, teaching, or in the sales and maintenance of cardiology equipment. With the 
increasing prevalence of heart-related conditions, the demand for skilled professionals in 
cardiology diagnostics is rising, ensuring a wide range of career opportunities in the healthcare 
sector. 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals). 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
 
 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central 
Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
as equivalent thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
 
0. B.Sc. Dialysis Technology (DT)  
Course Introduction: BSc in Dialysis Technology is an undergraduate program designed to 
train students in the operation and management of dialysis equipment for patients with kidney-
related issues. The curriculum includes subjects like renal physiology, Haemodialysis, 
Peritoneal Dialysis, and patient care techniques, etc. preparing students to assist in kidney 
function restoration and manage dialysis procedures. 
Scope: Graduates can work as Dialysis Technicians in hospitals, dialysis centres, and healthcare 
facilities, helping to monitor and maintain dialysis treatments for patients with chronic kidney 
disease. They may also find opportunities in research, teaching, or with dialysis equipment 
manufacturers. With the rise in kidney-related ailments globally, the demand for skilled Dialysis 
Technicians is increasing, offering stable career prospects in this critical healthcare field. 
Seats: 50 seats (Additional seats are available for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign 
nationals). 
Duration: 3 Years (Six semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with Physics, 
Chemistry and Biology and secured at least 50% marks in these subjects from Central 
Board of Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
as equivalent thereto. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
LATERAL ENTRY: 
Seats: 8 seats (excluding of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates, and foreign nationals) 
Duration: 2 Years (Four semesters) + 1 Year compulsory internship 
Eligibility: 
● A candidate must have passed a two-year Diploma in Dialysis Technology or equivalent in 
regular mode after 12th from science stream or 3-year regular Diploma after 10th 
examination with 50% marks in aggregate and recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit/aggregate percentage in qualifying 
examination. 
 
0. M.Sc. Medical Laboratory Sciences (MMLS) 
 
 
 
Course Introduction: MSc in Medical Laboratory Sciences is a postgraduate program that 
builds on the foundational knowledge of laboratory techniques, focusing on advanced diagnostic 
methods and research in medical laboratory science. The curriculum covers subjects like 
 
Molecular diagnostics, Clinical Biochemistry, Immunology, Haematology, and laboratory 
management, preparing students to take on leadership and specialized roles in clinical 
laboratories and research settings. 
Scope: Candidates can pursue careers as laboratory managers, clinical researchers, or specialists 
in fields like microbiology, biochemistry, and molecular diagnostics. They can also work in 
academic institutions, healthcare organizations, or pharmaceutical companies. With the growing 
complexity of diagnostic technologies and the need for high-level expertise, MSc Medical 
Laboratory Sciences professionals are in demand, ensuring ample career growth and 
opportunities in medical research, diagnostics, and healthcare management. 
Seats: 15 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
foreign national. 
Duration: Two years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● Passed B.Sc. Medical Lab Technology or equivalent with at least 50% marks in 
aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. M.Sc. Medical Radiology and Imaging Techniques (MMRIT)  
Course Introduction: MSc in Medical Radiology & Imaging Technology is a postgraduate 
program that focuses on advanced techniques in medical imaging and radiology. The curriculum 
covers topics such as advanced radiographic techniques, MRI, CT scans, ultrasound, nuclear 
medicine, and radiation safety, preparing students for specialized roles in diagnostic imaging 
and radiology. 
Scope: Candidates can work as Senior Radiology Technologists, imaging specialists, or clinical 
researchers in hospitals, diagnostic centres, and medical imaging companies. They may also 
pursue careers in academia, radiology equipment manufacturing, or research in imaging 
technologies. With the continuous advancement in imaging technologies and the rising demand 
for accurate diagnostics, professionals with expertise in radiology and imaging are highly sought 
after, offering significant career opportunities in healthcare and medical research. 
Seats: 15 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
foreign national. 
Duration: Two years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● Passed B.Sc. Medical Imaging Technology or equivalent with at least 50% marks in 
aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. M.Sc. Optometry (MOPT)  
Course Introduction: Master of Optometry is a postgraduate program that focuses on advanced 
eye care and vision science, building on the foundation provided in a Bachelor of Optometry. 
The curriculum includes topics such as advanced optometry practices, ocular diseases, refractive 
error management, contact lens fitting, low vision care, and vision therapy, etc. preparing 
students for specialized roles in eye care and research. 
 
Scope: Graduates can work as clinical optometrists, vision care specialists, or researchers in 
hospitals, optical clinics, vision centres, or academic institutions. They may also take on roles in 
managing and diagnosing complex ocular diseases, teaching, or working with optical product 
companies. With the increasing need for specialized eye care and the aging population, there are 
abundant career opportunities for Master of Optometry graduates, offering growth in clinical 
practice, research, and education. 
Seats: 15 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
foreign nationals. 
Duration: Two years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● Passed Bachelor of Optometry or equivalent with at least 50% marks in aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. M.Sc. Anesthesia and Operation Theatre Technology (MAOTT) 
 
 
Seats: 10 (Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
foreign national. 
 
Duration: Two years (4 Semesters) 
 
Eligibility: B.Sc. Anesthesia and Operation Theatre Techniques or B.Sc. in Anesthesia Techniques or 
B.Sc. Operation Theatre Techniques with at least 50% marks in aggregate. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. M.Sc. Dialysis Technology (MDT)  
Course Introduction: MSc in Dialysis Technology is a postgraduate program that provides 
advanced knowledge and skills in renal care and dialysis procedures. The curriculum covers 
topics such as Haemodialysis, Peritoneal Dialysis, Renal Physiology, patient care management, 
and dialysis equipment maintenance, preparing students for specialized roles in kidney care and 
dialysis treatment. 
Scope: Candidates can work as Dialysis Specialists, Renal Care Managers, or clinical 
researchers in hospitals, dialysis centres, and healthcare institutions. They may also pursue 
careers in teaching, healthcare administration, or in the development and maintenance of 
dialysis technologies. With the rising prevalence of kidney-related diseases, there is an 
increasing demand for skilled professionals in dialysis care, ensuring strong career prospects in 
healthcare settings focused on renal care. 
Seats: 10 ((Inclusive of seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
foreign nationals) 
 
Duration: Two years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● B.Sc. (Dialysis Therapy Technology) or equivalent with at least 50% marks in aggregate. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in qualifying examination. 
 
 
0. Ph.D. Paramedical Sciences (with specialization)  
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. for the session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility:  
 
 
● Candidate must have completed Master’s degree in a relevant discipline of Paramedical 
Sciences / Relevant Degree with 50% of marks from any University/ Institution 
recognized by UGC or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the UGC 7-point scale. 
● NET-JRF/GATE/SLET/GAT-B qualified candidates and Project Fellows will be given 
preference for admissions in Ph.D. programs. 
● Ph.D. Ordinance, 2021 will be followed in for all Ph.D. related matters. 
 
Selection process: 
 
 
● Selection for the Ph.D. will be based on merit of entrance test and interview conducted 
by Jamia Hamdard. 
● Candidates in service shall forward application along with the No Objection Certificate 
(NOC) from the Head of the Institution, where the candidate is working. 
● PhD Ordinance, 2021 will be followed in for all PhD related matters.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
School of Engineering Sciences & 
Technology (SEST) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof. Farheen Siddiqui 
 
 
 
Department of Computer Science & Engineering 
 
The Department of Computer Science & Engineering in the School of Engineering Sciences & 
Technology started in 1997, and it has grown now into a vibrant center of teaching and research. The 
Department not only offers Under Graduate (UG) and Post Graduate (PG) Programmes in Computer 
Science & Engineering / Computer Application / IT / ECE / Data Science/ Cyber Forensics & 
Information Security but is also engaged in high-quality research activities leading to Ph.D. degree in 
different thrust areas of computer science and engineering and interdisciplinary areas viz. Big Data, 
Soft Computing, IoT, Neural Network, Artificial Intelligence, Fuzzy Logic, Software Engineering, 
Data Mining, Information Security, Cyber laws, Cyber Forensics, Computer Architecture, Graph 
Theory, Computer Networks, Distributed System, Discrete Structure, Robotics, Machine Intelligence, 
Telecommunication, Mobile Computing, DBMS, Algorithms, VLSI Design etc. to list a few. 
Department has made a lot of contributions towards these areas in the form of publications in 
journals/conference-proceedings/books/sponsored research and collaboration with the industry. 
 
 
 
The department has a huge infrastructure to provide facilities to our students. The department has 
several smart cluster rooms fully equipped with state of art of technology. It also has 2 computer labs 
with the latest PCs having an i5 processor with 8 GB RAM and 1 TB storage. The computer lab is fully 
equipped with the latest Open Source Software as per our curriculum requirement running on Ubuntu 
OS. Several PC’s in Computer Lab at 1st floor runs on Windows OS having required software for 
academics. The Department also has a Research Lab (2nd Floor, Department of CSE) for our Ph.D. 
students. These labs are fully equipped with Air Conditioning and CCTV cameras have been installed 
too. The Department has 1 Conference Room with a seating capacity of more than 100 for conducting 
departmental meetings and student seminars. In ECE domain, we have basic and advanced Electronics 
& Communication Labs according to the required curriculum. These labs include Analog & Digital 
Labs, Embedded Systems Lab, FPGA Development kits, DSP Lab, Satellite & Microwave Lab, Digital 
Design Lab etc. The ECE labs have software as per the academic curriculum and these labs are 
equipped with updated and advanced instruments. The department also has high-end computing and 
Artificial Intelligence Lab. Recently the Ministry of Telecommunications, Government of India 
has awarded 5G Use case Lab to Jamia Hamdard which is among four in NCR Region. 
The students are provided internships and trainings via the MoU's signed with several setups like the 
AICTE's Internshala Scheme, Co-Cubes and RnF (for Campus placements), and ETrain India Pvt. Ltd 
for conducting seminars/workshops which are Microsoft/Adobe certified. These certifications open an 
arena of opportunities which are unmatched for. 
The campus placements (On-site or Off-site) have big giants in the industry like TCS, Wipro, HCL, 
Fiserv, RnF, and Ericcson to name a few which recruit students and they prove to be assets to the 
industry. Student chapters of International Professional bodies like IEEE, and National like CSI, ISTE, 
and IETE are to the credit of the Department. These open avenues are wide and enable students to 
enhance their technical skills. These also help the students to showcase their talent with several non-
technical events organized from time to time. Besides exemplary academic record our department also 
has an MoU with Reaching Sky Foundation (an NGO) which targets the social causes and perform 
several programs that fall under Unnat Bharat, Govt. of India, scheme. 
The department has a pool of highly qualified teachers and technical staff members as per UGC/AICTE 
norms. Several teachers of the department have been awarded/granted National and International 
patents. The vibrancy of research programs at the department is accentuated by the high - quality 
publications including books, book chapters, scientific papers and research articles in highly reputed 
indexed journals with indexing services like SCI, SCIE, SCOPUS and Springer. In addition, Research 
projects from several govt. agencies like UGC, DST, DBT, DIT, AICTE are to the credit of the faculty 
members. The department also has an Entrepreneurship cell (E-cell) which motivates the students to 
think about innovations in day-to-day life. To sensitize students of the department about societal issues 
related to women, it has an active Women-cell which conducts activities related to women and girl 
students. An Institution Innovation cell approved by the MHRD's Innovation Cell, Govt. of India has 
been bestowed upon to the institution. The Department has been recognized by the Department of 
Science and Technology with a grant approved under the FIST scheme. 
Another milestone achieved by department is the approval of several Full-time and Part-Time seats by 
the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology under the Visvesvaraya PhD Scheme of 
MeitY. Govt.of India.Financial support in the form of fellowship, RoR, institutional overhead and 
research contingency is provided 
 
 
 
 
Academic Staff 
 
Prof. (Dr.) M. Afshar Alam, Ph.D., Professor 
Prof. Farheen Siddiqui, Ph.D., Professor, Dean SEST 
Prof. Sameena Naaz, Ph.D., Professor (On Leave) 
Prof. Parul Agarwal, Ph.D., Professor, Head CSE 
Prof. Harleen Kaur, Ph.D., Professor 
Dr. Ihtiram Raza Khan, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Jawed Ahmed, Ph.D., Associate Professor  
Dr. Shabina Ghafir, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Bhavya Alankar, Ph.D., Associate Professor  
Dr. Safdar Tanweer, Ph.D., Associate Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Abdul Ahad, Ph.D., Associate Professor  
Dr. Suraiya Parveen, Ph.D., Associate Professor 
Dr. Md. Tabrez Nafis, Ph.D., Associate Professor  
Mr. Syed Sibtain Khalid, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Mr. Tabish Mufti, MCA, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Siddhartha Sankar Biswas, Ph.D., Assistant Professor   
Ms. Gautami Tripathi, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Aqeel Khalique, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Anam Saiyeda, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sapna Jain, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Richa Gupta, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sherin Zafar, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Zeeshan Ali Haq, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Imran Hussain, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Faraz Doja, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Ms. Neha, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Nafisur Rahman, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Uzma Akhtar Khan, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shakeel Ahmad Siddiqui, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Shah Imran Alam, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Mr. Naved Alam, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Amit Bhooshan Singh, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Mr. Piyush Kumar Gupta, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Nida lftekhar, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Mr. Syed Ali Mehdi, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Mr. Tabrej Ahmad Khan, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Pooja Gupta, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Sohrab Ali Khan, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Ayesha Kamal, M.A., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Taqdees Fatima, M.A., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mohd Shadab Alam, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Md. Omair Ahmad, M.Tech., Assistant Professor  
Dr. Naseem Rao, Ph.D., Assistant Professor  
Ms. Asfia Aziz, MCA, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mohammad Sufian Badar, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Atul Kumar Jaiswal, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Kaveri Umesh Kadam, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Aaina, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
 
 
Dr. Zaira Bano, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sultana Parween, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Sajid Anwer, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Rehan Saeed Khan, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Nayer, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Saoud Sarwar, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Ms. Nusrat Jahan, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Abuzar Ghaffari, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Mubashshir Hasan Farooqi, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sabahat Ali Khan, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Safia Ahmad, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Afzal Ahmad, M.Tech., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sumeet Kumar, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Ms. Juveria, MCA, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Shariq Asnain, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shahzad Ahmad, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md Shamim Akhter, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Dr. Kusum, Ph.D., Assistant Professor 
Mr. Abdul Kalam, Ex CMD of Coal India – Professor of Practice  
 
Adjunct Faculties 
Prof. Valentina Emilia Balas, Aurel Vlaicu University of Arad, Romania 
Prof. Nevine Makram Labib, Sadat Academy of Management Sciences, Cairo, Egypt 
Prof. Gulsun Meric, Anadolu University, Turkiye 
Dr. Sara Paiva, Instituto Politecnico de Viana do Castelo, Portugal 
Dr. Meena Jha, Central Queensland University, Sydney, Australia 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
Undergraduate Courses 
1. B. Tech. Computer Science & Engineering-B.Tech (CSE) 
 
Seats: 180, Inclusive of seats reserved for NRI/ sponsored candidates; additional seats are available For 
Foreign Nationals 
Duration: 4 Years  
Eligibility: 
● A candidate seeking admission to this program must have passed Senior Secondary (12th 
/Intermediate) examination with at least five subjects (all passed) having Mathematics and 
Physics (both compulsory) subjects, and one subject out of the following: Chemistry / 
Computer Science / Electronics / Information Technology / Biology /Informatics Practices / 
Biotechnology / Technical Vocational subject /Agriculture / Engineering Graphics / Business 
Studies / Entrepreneurship from CBSE or any other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as 
equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit in Paper-1 (B.E. /B.Tech.) of JEE (Main) 2025. In 
case of delay in conduct of JEE-2025 or if JEE candidates are not available, the University may offer 
admission on the basis of merit of aggregate percentage in qualifying examination. 
 
2. B.Tech. Electronics and Communication Engineering-B.Tech. (ECE) 
 
Seats: 60, inclusive of seats reserved for NRI/ sponsored candidates; additional seats are available for 
Foreign Nationals 
Duration: 4 Years  
Eligibility: 
● A candidate seeking admission to this program must have passed Senior Secondary (12th 
/Intermediate) examination with at least five subjects (all passed) having Mathematics and 
Physics (both compulsory) subjects, and one subject out of the following: Chemistry / 
Computer Science / Electronics / Information Technology / Biology /Informatics Practices / 
Biotechnology / Technical Vocational subject /Agriculture / Engineering Graphics / Business 
Studies / Entrepreneurship from CBSE or any other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as 
equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit in Paper-1 (B.E. /B.Tech.) of JEE (Main) 2025. In 
case of delay in conduct of JEE-2025 or if JEE candidates are not available, the University may offer 
admission on the basis of merit of aggregate percentage in qualifying examination. 
3. B.Tech. Computer Science and Engineering (Artificial Intelligence) 
 
Seats: 30, inclusive of seats reserved for NRI / sponsored candidates; additional seats are available for 
Foreign Nationals. 
Duration: 4 Years  
Eligibility: 
● A candidate seeking admission to this program must have passed Senior Secondary (12th 
/Intermediate) examination with at least five subjects (all passed) having Mathematics and 
Physics (both compulsory) subjects, and one subject out of the following: Chemistry / 
Computer Science / Electronics / Information Technology / Biology /Informatics Practices / 
Biotechnology / Technical Vocational subject /Agriculture / Engineering Graphics / Business 
Studies / Entrepreneurship from CBSE or any other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as 
equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection process: Selection will be based on merit in Paper-1 (B.E. /B.Tech.) of JEE (Main) 2025. In 
case of delay in conduct of JEE-2025 or if JEE candidates are not available, the University may offer 
admission on the basis of merit of aggregate percentage in qualifying examination. 
4. Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) 
Seats: 120 
Duration: 3 years  
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to this program must have passed the Senior Secondary 
(12th Standard/Intermediate) examination with at least five subjects (compulsorily passed) from CBSE 
or any other Boards recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks 
or equivalent CGPA in aggregate and also must have one of the following subjects as passed subjects:  
 
Mathematics, Business Mathematics, Accountancy, Data Entry Operations, Web Technology, Web 
Application, Multimedia, Computer Science, Computer Application, Information Technology, 
Information Practices, Informatics Practices, Typography and Computer Application, Or any other 
equivalent computer related subjects. 
 
Selection Process: On the basis of merit of aggregate percentage of the qualifying examination. 
5. Bachelor of Science in Computer Science with Research 
It is a 4 year research based interdisciplinary program 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 4 year/ 8 semester with provision of multiple entry and exit and maximum duration of 7 
years 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to this program must have passed Senior Secondary (12th 
/Intermediate) examination with at least 5 subjects (all passed) having Physics as compulsory subject, 
and one subject out of the following: Mathematics / Chemistry / Computer Science / Electronics / 
Information Technology / Biology /Informatics Practices / Biotechnology / Technical Vocational 
subject /Agriculture / Engineering Graphics / Business Studies / Entrepreneurship from CBSE or any 
other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or 
equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
CUET Subjects: Mathematics / Applied Mathematics / Physics / Chemistry / Computer Science / 
Informatics Practices. 
Selection Process: On the basis of merit of CUET-2025. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection may be offered on the 
basis of merit of aggregate percentage in qualifying examination. 
6. Lateral Entry to 2nd Year in B.Tech. (CSE) 
Seats: Up to the maximum of 10% of the "approved intake" plus unfilled vacancies of the first year (if 
any). 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to B.Tech (CSE) lateral entry must have passed Diploma 
Engineering in any branch from a recognized institution/university securing at least 50% marks or 
equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection process: The admission will be on the basis of the merit of the qualifying examination. 
7. Lateral Entry to 2nd Year in B.Tech. (ECE) 
Seats: Up to the maximum of 10% of the "approved intake" plus unfilled vacancies of the first year (if 
any). 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to B.Tech. (ECE) lateral entry must have passed Diploma 
Engineering in any branch from a recognized institution/ university securing at least 50% marks or 
equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
 
 
Selection process: The admission will be on the   basis   of   merit   of   the qualifying examination. 
Postgraduate Courses 
Master of Computer Applications (MCA) 
Seats: 60, inclusive of seats reserved for NRI / sponsored candidates; additional seats are available for 
Foreign Nationals. 
Duration: 2 Years  
Eligibility: 
● Passed BBA/B.E./B.Tech./BCA/B.Sc./B.Com./B.A. with Mathematics at 10+2 level or at 
Graduation Level and Obtained at least 50% marks in aggregate in the qualifying Examination. 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination. 
 
M.Sc. (Computational Biology & System Biology and Bioinformatics) 
Seats: 10 candidates; inclusive of seats reserved for NRI / sponsored candidates; additional seats are 
available for Foreign Nationals.  
Duration: 2 years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● A minimum of 55% marks in Bachelor’s degree program in bioinformatics, or any           branch 
of basic/applied Sciences or Technology, including Life Sciences, Medicine, Pharmacy, 
Engineering and Computer Science and allied disciplines. 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination. 
Regular M.Tech. Courses:  
Seats: 30 (28 seats General and 02 seats reserved for Industry /NRI sponsored candidates) 
1. M.Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering)- M.Tech. (CSE) 
Duration: 2 years (4 Semesters) 
 
 
 
Eligibility: 
● Passed B.Tech./ BE or equivalent degree in Computer Science/ Computer Science & 
Engineering/ Computer Engineering/ Information Technology/Software Engineering/ ICT with 
at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate 
(OR) 
● MCA 
or 
M.Sc 
in 
IT/ 
Computer 
Science/Information 
Science 
& 
Technology/Electronics/Software Engineering or equivalent degree with at least 55 % marks(or 
equivalent CGPA)in aggregate. 
 
 
(OR) 
● B.Tech./B.E. or equivalent degree in Electronics & Communication/ Electronics Engineering/ 
Electrical Engineering with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate. 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination. 
2. M.Tech. (CSE) with Specialization in Data Science 
Duration: 2 years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● Passed B.Tech. / B.E. or equivalent degree in Computer Science / Computer Science and 
Engineering / Computer Engineering / Information Technology / Software Engineering / ICT 
with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate. 
(OR) 
● Passed B.Tech. / B.E. or equivalent degree in Electronics & Communication / Electronics 
Engineering / Electrical Engineering with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate. 
(OR) 
● Passed MCA or M.Sc. (CS), M.Sc. (IT), M.Sc. (Software Engineering), M.Sc. (Electronics) 
with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate. 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination. 
3. M.Tech. (CSE) with Specialization in Cyber Forensics and Information Security 
Duration: 2 years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
● Passed B.Tech. / B.E. or equivalent degree in Computer Science / Computer Science and 
Engineering / Computer Engineering / Information Technology / Software Engineering / ICT 
with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate. 
(OR) 
● Passed B.Tech. / B.E. or equivalent degree in Electronics & Communication / Electronics 
Engineering / Electrical Engineering with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate. 
(OR) 
● Passed MCA or M.Sc. (CS), M.Sc. (IT), M.Sc. (Software Engineering), M.Sc. (Electronics) 
with at least 55% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate. 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination. 
Ph.D. (Regular) Courses 
1. Ph.D. in Computer Science &Engineering-Ph.D. (CSE) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. program from session 2025-26 will be released in the month of 
April, 2025. 
 
 
Eligibility: 
● M.Tech. /M.E. in Computer Science/IT /Computer Engineering (or in allied field), with at least 
60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the 
Association of Indian Universities (AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
2. Ph.D. in Computer Science-Ph.D. (CS) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme from session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility: 
● MCA /M.Sc. in Computer Science / IT with at least 60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate 
from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRFI Individual Fellowship holders/ Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
3. Ph.D. in Electronics & Communication Engineering- Ph.D (ECE)   
The notification for admission in Ph.D. program from session 2025-26 will be released in the month of 
April, 2025. 
Eligibility: 
● M.Tech./M.E. in Electronics and Communication Engineering / Electrical Engineering / Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering (or in allied field), with at least 60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
Ph.D. (Part-Time) Courses 
1. Ph.D. in Computer Science & Engineering-Ph.D. (CSE) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme from session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility: 
● M.Tech. /M.E. in Computer Science/IT /Computer Engineering (or in allied field), with at least 
60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the 
Association of lndian Universities (AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/ Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
 
 
2. Ph.D. in Computer Science-Ph.D. (CS) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme from session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April,2025. 
 
Eligibility: 
● MCA / M.Sc. in Computer Science / IT with at least 60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in aggregate 
from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UOC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF / Individual Fellowship holders / Project Fellows will be given preference for admission 
in the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
3. Ph.D. in Electronics & Communication Engineering -Ph.D (ECE) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. program from session 2025-26 will be released in the month of 
April, 2025. 
Eligibility: 
● M.Tech./M.E. in Electronics and Communication Engineering / Electrical Engineering / Electrical 
and Electronics Engineering (or in allied field), with at least 60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
 
NOTE: The time of thesis submission would be one year more for Part-Time than the regular Ph.D. course. For 
more information, refer to the university Bye-Laws. 
 
Ph.D. (Part-Time) Courses 
 
1. Ph.D. in Electronics & Communication Engineering -Ph.D (ECE) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. program from session 2025-26 will be released in the month of 
April, 2025. 
Eligibility: 
● M.Tech./M.E. in Electronics and Communication Engineering/Electrical Engineering/Electrical and 
Electronics Engineering or in allied field, with at least 60% marks (or equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
● NET-JRF Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be given preference for admission in 
the Ph.D. programme. 
● Non-NET candidates shall also be eligible. 
 
NOTE: The time of thesis submission would be one year more for Part-Time than the regular Ph.D. course. For 
more information, refer to the university Bye-Laws. 
 
 
 
 
School of Management and Business Studies 
(SMBS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof.  Syed Nadimul Haque 
 
Management education was introduced in Jamia Hamdard in the year 1998. Since then, it has become 
one of the important units of the University. The School of Management & Business Studies (SMBS) 
has three departments namely, Department of Management, Department of Healthcare & 
Pharmaceutical Management and Department of Hotel Management and Catering Technology. Today 
more than 1200 students are enrolled in the school for various PG and UG courses. Owing to the core 
competencies of the faculty, the school has made a name for itself, both among industry erudite and 
intelligentsia. 
 
The teaching pedagogy employed in SMBS is a combination of theoretical concept with practical 
application. The school is well endowed with intellectual capital and field experience with both senior 
and young faculty members who have plenty of research experience behind them and extensive 
industry experience in the domain of Management specializations like Marketing, Finance, Human 
Resources, Operations Management, International Business and Entrepreneurship, Public Health, 
Healthcare Management, Pharmaceutical Management, Hotel management, Commerce, Supply chain 
management etc.  
 
Placement/Internships activities are coordinated by a placement cell headed by, Training and Placement 
Officer, comprising of selected student representatives and faculty members. This includes both 
summer internship as well as final placement. 
Department of Management 
 
The Department of Management Studies was established in the year 1998, offering MBA Program with 
specialisations in Marketing, Finance, Human Resource, Operations Management and IT Management. 
Two more specialisations have been added over the period, namely International Business and  
 
Entrepreneurship. Ever since its inception, the department has aimed at broadening students 'outlook, 
strengthening their soft skills, with emphasis on the personality development of the student. In the year 
2014, the Bachelors Program of BBA was initiated, which has been a well-received program. In the 
year 2020, the Department also started offering B.Com. The teaching pedagogy is a judicious mix of 
theoretical concepts with practical application. This is achieved by discussing the latest developments 
in management thinking and their applications in the Indian context through case studies, club 
activities, seminars, guest lectures and industrial tours. The students are encouraged to overcome the 
limitations of classroom education by attending club activities that also provide a platform for polishing 
communication and presentation skills. They also organize, Business Plan Competitions, Case Study 
Competitions, Biz-Quiz, Debates, Ad-mad shows etc. through which learning becomes a pleasant 
experience. In order to have interaction with the corporate world, the MBA Programme incorporates 
guest lecturers as part of its curriculum. The department invites guest speakers from the industry to 
interact with the students and give insights in contemporary issues and developments. To develop 
academic excellence the Department of Management offers full-time and part-time doctoral (Ph.D.) 
program in Management in various areas of expertise. 
 
 
Academic Staff 
Dr. Syed Nadimul Haque, Professor & Dean 
Dr. Sana Beg, Professor & Head  
Dr. Reshma Nasreen, Professor  
Dr. Syeedun Nisa, Professor 
Dr. Md. Shahnawaz Abdin, Professor  
Dr. Noria Farooqui, Associate Professor  
Dr. Sadaf Siraj, Associate Professor 
Dr. Nudrat Moini Rehman, Associate Professor  
Dr Abdullah, Assistant Professor 
Dr Mohammed Jamshed, Assistant Professor 
Dr Asad Ahmad, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Matloob Ullah Khan, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Ayisha Shaikh, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Manpreet Kaur Bhatia, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shikha Gera, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Shahzad Alam, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Fakhra Naeem, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mohd Shafeeq, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Vardah Saghir, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Babar Ali Khan, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Syed Zakir Hussain, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Khushboo Bhasin, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mohd. Yousuf Javed, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Matloob Hasan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Sarwar Alam, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Arif Anwar, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sna Farooqui, Assistant Professor   
Dr. Faizan Khan Sherwani, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mansoor Ahmad, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Farzana, Assistant Professor    
Dr. Ghausia Taj Begum, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Ariba Naz, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Faezah Roohani, Assistant Professor 
 
 
Dr. Mazia Fatima Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Arham Adnan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Peer Asif Ahmad, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohd. Sarim, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohammad Juned, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Misra, Professor of Practice 
Mr. Taj Hassan, IPS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
Mr. Abdul Kalam, Ex CMD, Coal India – Professor of Practice  
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
BBA (Bachelor of Business Administration) 
 
Seats: 180 
 
Duration:  4 years/ 8 semesters 
 
Eligibility: 10+2 from any recognized board with 50% aggregate marks. 
 
Selection Process: The candidate will be selected on the basis of the CUET 2025 score in the General 
test and/ or the first five subjects in the qualifying examination. 
 
B.Com (Bachelor of Commerce)  
 
Seats: 60 
 
Duration: 4 years/ 8 semesters  
 
Eligibility: 10+2 from any recognized board with 50% aggregate marks. 
 
Selection Process: The candidate will be selected on the basis of the CUET 2025 score in the General 
test and/ or the first five subjects in the qualifying examination. 
Master of Business Administration (MBA)   
 
The Department of Management offers MBA degrees with various specialization in Management viz., 
Marketing, Finance, Human Resources, Operations Management, Information Technology, 
International Business and Entrepreneurship. 
 
Seats: 180 
Duration:      2 years/ 4 semesters 
Eligibility:  
i. Bachelor's degree in any discipline with minimum 50% aggregate marks/ CGPA 5 on a 10-point 
scale. Candidates in their final year of graduation are also eligible to apply. Their final admission is 
subject to the availability of a final mark sheet/provisional degree. Candidates from the final year 
Graduate Programme need to submit the aggregate marks up to the 4th semester (for the 3-Year UG 
Programme) and should be a minimum of 50% or CGPA 5 on a 10-point Scale. * 
 
 
 
ii. Candidates 
who 
have 
appeared 
in 
any 
national 
level 
aptitude 
test 
like 
CAT/CMAT/MAT/GMAT/XAT/GPAT/ATMA and possess a valid score card. 
 
* Admission shall be cancelled if in any case candidates do not meet the eligibility criteria. 
 
Exemptions from the Aptitude Test 
● Mid-career professionals with 2 years of work experience (after graduation).  
● Candidates who have completed an undergraduate programme of four-year or above duration 
(Example: BE/ B.Tech/ MBBS/ BA LLB, etc.) with a minimum of 50% aggregate marks/CGPA of 
5 on a 10-point scale. Candidates in their final year of undergraduate programme with four-year or 
above duration (Example: BE/B.Tech/MBBS/BA LLB, etc.) need to submit the aggregate marks up 
to 6th semester. * 
● Candidates who have obtained first division in at least two examinations out of three i.e. 10th, 12th 
& Undergraduate with second division in the third examination. However, no candidates will be 
called for GD & PI if they fail to secure a minimum 50% or 5 CGPA on a 10-point Scale in their 
Graduation.  
 
Selection Process: On the basis of eligibility criteria/exemptions mentioned above, eligible candidates 
will be called for GD/PI at the Jamia Hamdard campus/online mode as per the prevailing condition 
during the time of GD/PI. 
 
For NRI/Sponsored Seats: CMAT / MAT / GMAT / XAT / CAT / ATMA scores are not necessary; 
admission will be determined solely on the basis of their performance in GD/PI. 
 
 
Ph.D. (Management) 
The notification for admission in the Ph.D. programme session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Duration: 3 years minimum 
 
Eligibility: Master's Degree (preferably MBA/PGDM) or a Professional degree declared equivalent to 
Master's degree with at least 55% aggregate marks (or equivalent CGPA) from any 
University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU/UGC/AICTE)/ 
corresponding statutory body. 
 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs 
 
Part time Ph.D. (Management) 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme session 2025-26 will be released in the month of 
April, 2025. 
 
The part-time Ph.D. Programme is a professional doctoral degree, designed to enhance executive and 
professional practice through the application of sound theory and rigorous research into real and 
complex issues in business and management. Key to this is a programme to hone personal, consultancy 
and research skills amongst working professionals at different management levels. 
Corporate executives working with reputed organizations in India applying for admission to the part 
time Ph.D. Program shall be eligible as per the following conditions: 
 
 
 
 
Duration: 4 years minimum. The overall duration will be as per UGC Regulations for Ph.D. 
 
Eligibility: 
Master's Degree (preferably MBA/PGDM) or a Professional degree declared equivalent to Master's 
degree with at least 55% aggregate marks (or equivalent CGPA) from any University/Institution 
recognized by the Association of Indian Universities (AIU/UGC/AICTE)/ corresponding statutory 
body. Candidate must have five years of post-PG experience 
 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions to Ph.D. 
programs 
Selection Process for Ph.D. (Management) and Part-time Ph.D. (Management) Programmes: 
The admission process would be a two-tier process 
● First stage would include a qualifying PhD entrance test, conducted by Jamia Hamdard 
● NET/JRF-qualified candidates are exempted from the PhD entrance test and will directly qualify for 
the second stage. 
● The second stage will include an interview organized by the School of Management and Business 
Studies, Jamia Hamdard, where the candidate is required to discuss his/her research interest/area 
through a presentation before a duly constituted Department Research Committee. 
 
The interview shall also consider the following aspects, viz. whether:  
● The candidate possesses the competence for the proposed research; 
● The research work can be suitably undertaken at the Institution 
● The proposed area of research can contribute to new/additional knowledge. 
 
 
           DEPARTMENT OF HEALTHCARE & PHARMACEUTICAL MANAGEMENT 
 
Jamia Hamdard started offering MBA degrees in Healthcare and Pharmaceutical Management in the 
year 2005 with the mission to develop qualified healthcare and pharmaceutical management 
professionals to play an active role in improving the standards of healthcare delivery. Later on, a 
separate Department of Healthcare and Pharmaceutical Management was created under the School of 
Management & Business Studies to give more focus to healthcare education. Our comprehensive and 
integrated curriculum is designed for students in their early careers with a range of diverse 
backgrounds. Graduates will be able to exhibit knowledge expansion, competency development, and 
practical skills in the management of health-related enterprises. The teaching process includes the latest 
theoretical concepts with practical application. Today our Alumni are successfully working in the 
Hospitals, Healthcare and Pharmaceutical Organizations of India and abroad in a very reputed brand & 
contributing to improving the healthcare standards of the community.  
 
ACADEMIC STAFF  
Dr. Shibu John, Head, Professor & HoD 
Dr. N. Ravichandran, Professor  
Dr. Mohd. Faisal Khan, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Prithvi Shankar Raychaudhuri, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Sakhi John, Assistant Professor  
 
 
Mr. Ubada Aqeel, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Jwaad Akhtar Khan, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Arshiya Farooqui, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Saad Bin Azhar, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Fahad Afzal, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nazish Rahat, Assistant Professor, 
Mr. Jahangir, Khan, Assistant Professor 
 
Bachelor of Management Studies (BMS) - Healthcare Management  
Seats: 30  
Duration: 4 Years (8 Semesters) as per UGC-NEP 2020 guidelines.  
Eligibility: The student must have passed intermediate/12th class board exams from CBSE/ICSE or any 
other recognized central or state board with a minimum of 50%. Science, Commerce, and Arts stream 
students can apply for BMS admission.  
Selection procedure: Selection will be made on the basis of the merit of Qualifying Exam/ CUET 2025 
score in General subjects 
MBA (Healthcare and Hospital Management)  
Seats: 60  
Duration: 2 years  
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in discipline* with minimum 50% aggregate marks or core CGPA 5 on a 
10-point scale. Candidates in their final year of graduation are also eligible to apply. Final admission is 
subject to the availability of a final mark sheet/provisional degree.  
Selection Process: Shortlisted candidates based on eligibility will be called for Group Discussion (GD) 
and Personal Interview (Pl) to be conducted at the Jamia Hamdard campus. Selection will be made on 
the basis of overall merit determined by the University on the basis of performance in GD/PI and marks 
in the Graduation and Industry Work Experience.   
 
**Discipline - MBBS/BUMS/BAMS/BHMS/BDS/B.Pharm/B.Sc (all 4 years professional life 
sciences/biomedical sciences, healthcare & medical devices oriented courses para-medical courses 
including Nursing, Medical Laboratory Techniques, Rehabilitations Sciences-Occupation Therapy, 
Physiotherapy, Emergency and Trauma care Techniques, Medical Imaging Techniques, Anesthesia and 
Operation Theatre Techniques, Cardiology Techniques, Bio Medical Engineering, and Dialysis 
Techniques, B.Sc. (Life sciences/Zoology/Botany), B.Sc. in Medical Laboratory Technology, B.Sc. in 
Medical X-Ray and Imaging Technology, B.Sc. in Medical Dialysis Technology, B.Sc. in Medical 
Emergency and Trauma Care Technology (BETCT), B.Sc. in Operation Theatre Technology (BOTT), 
B.Sc. in Optometry Technology (BOT), B.Sc.in Medical Cardiac Technology (BMCT), Bachelor in 
Health Administration/Bachelor in Hospital Management (BHA/BHM), Bachelor in Health 
Information Management/Record Management (BMRT) B.Tech. (Biotech)/B.Sc. (Biotech), Bachelor 
 
in Biomedical Engineering/Bachelor in Medical Instrumentation (BME), Bachelor of Prosthetics and 
Orthotics, Bachelor of Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology, Bachelor in Bioinformatics, 
Bachelor in Dietetics, Bachelor in Forensic Science, Bachelor in Psychology, Bachelor in Genetics, 
B.Sc. (Biochem)/B.Sc. (Chem) all M.Sc. courses. Candidates having a Bachelor's Degree in a 
discipline other than those mentioned above shall have to satisfy at least one condition mentioned 
below to be able to become eligible for the MBA (Public Health Management/Hospital Administration) 
program. • Mid-career professionals with at least 2 years of experience. • Candidates who have 
appeared in any national level  
aptitude test like MAT/CAT/CMAT /GMAT/XAT/GPAT/ATMA and possess a valid score card • 
Candidates with very good academic record, subject to approval from the university competent 
authority. For NRI/Sponsored Seats: CMAT/MAT/GMAT/XAT/CAT/GPAT/ATMA score is not 
required. They will have to appear for an English proficiency Test conducted by Jamia Hamdard, GD 
& PI.  
MBA (Pharmaceutical Management)  
Seats: 60  
Duration: 2 years  
Eligibility: Bachelor's degree in Pharmacy/discipline* with minimum 50% aggregate marks or core 
CGPA 5 on a 10-point scale. Candidates in their final year of graduation are also eligible to apply. 
Final admission is subject to the availability of a final mark sheet/provisional degree. Selection process: 
Shortlisted candidates based on eligibility will be called for Group Discussion (GD) and Personal 
Interview (Pl) to be conducted at the Jamia Hamdard campus. Selection will be made on the basis of 
overall merit determined by the University on the basis of performance in GD/PI and marks in the 
Graduation and Industry Work Experience.  
*Discipline - Candidates with MBBS/BUMS/BAMS/BHMS/BDS/B.Pharm./B.Sc. (all 4 years 
professional life sciences/biomedical sciences/healthcare & medical devices oriented courses 
paramedical courses including Nursing, Medical Laboratory Techniques, Rehabilitations Sciences, 
Occupation Therapy, Physiotherapy, Emergency and Trauma care Techniques, Medical Imaging 
Techniques, Anaesthesia and Operation Theatre Techniques, Cardiology Techniques, Bio-Medical 
Engineering, and Dialysis Techniques, B.Sc. (Life sciences/Zoology/Botany), B.Sc. in Medical 
Laboratory Technology, B.Sc. in Medical X-Ray and Imaging Technology, B.Sc. in Medical Dialysis 
Technology, B.Sc. in Medical Emergency and Trauma Care Technology (BETCT), B.Sc. in Operation 
Theatre Technology (BOTT), B.Sc. in Optometry Technology (BOT), B.Sc.in Medical Cardiac 
Technology (BMCT), Bachelor in Health Administration/Bachelor in Hospital Management 
(BHA/BHM), Bachelor in Health Information Management/Record Management ( BMRT)  
 
 
B.Tech. (Biotech)/B.Sc. (Biotech), Bachelor in Bio medical Engineering/Bachelor in Medical 
Instrumentation (BME), Bachelor of Prosthetics and Orthotics, Bachelor of Audiology and Speech 
Language Pathology, Bachelor in Bioinformatics, Bachelor in Dietetics, Bachelor in Forensic Science, 
Bachelor in Psychology, Bachelor in Genetics, B.Sc. (Biochem)/B.Sc. (Chem) all M.Sc. courses are 
exempted 
from 
MAT 
and 
other 
competitive 
examinations. 
For 
NRI/Sponsored 
Seats: 
CMAT/MAT/GMAT/XAT/CAT/GPAT/ATMA score is not required. They will have to appear for an 
English proficiency Test conducted by Jamia Hamdard, GD & PI.  
Ph.D. (Health Management and Pharmaceutical Management) Full Time: 
Areas: Public Health, Pharmaceutical Management, Epidemiology, Public Policy, Hospital 
Management, Insurance, Economics, Sociology Eligibility: MBA/MHA/M. Pharm. and other Master’s 
degree in the subject concerned with at least 55% marks; or Master's degree in allied subjects with at 
least 55% marks (or Equivalent CGPA) in aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the 
Association 
of 
Indian 
Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. 
NET-JRF/Individual 
Fellowship 
holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. programs. Non-NET candidates shall 
also be eligible. Their admission will be based on an entrance examination conducted by Jamia 
Hamdard followed by an interview.  
Ph.D. (Health Management and Pharmaceutical Management) Part-Time: 
The part-time Ph.D. Programme is a professional doctoral degree, designed to enhance executive and 
professional practice through the application of sound theory and rigorous research into real and 
complex business and health management issues. Key to this is a programme to hone personal, 
consultancy, and research skills amongst working professionals at different management levels. 
Corporate Professionals/Faculty members/Researchers working with reputed organizations in 
India/abroad applying for admission to the part-time PhD program shall be eligible as per the following 
conditions: Duration: 4 years minimum. The overall duration will be as per UGC Regulations for Ph.D. 
Eligibility: MBA/MHA/M. Pharm. and other Master’s degree in the subject concerned with at least 
55% marks; or Master's degree in allied subjects with at least 55% marks (or Equivalent CGPA) in 
aggregate from any University/Institution recognized by the Association of Indian Universities 
(AIU)/UGC/AICTE. Minimum 5 years of work experience in the healthcare industry/ education/ or any 
other relevant sector.  
Selection Process for Ph.D. (Health Management and Pharmaceutical Management) (FullTime) and 
Ph.D. (Health Management and Pharmaceutical Management) (Part-Time)  
Programmes: The admission process would be a two-tier process • First stage would include a 
qualifying PhD entrance test, conducted by Jamia Hamdard. • NET/JRF-qualified candidates are 
exempted from the PhD entrance test and will directly qualify for the second stage. • The second stage  
 
will include an interview organized by the School of Management and Business Studies, Jamia 
Hamdard, where the candidate is required to discuss his/her research interest/area through a 
presentation before a duly constituted Department Research Committee. The interview shall also 
consider the following aspects, viz. whether: The candidate possesses the competence for the proposed 
research; the research work can be suitably undertaken at the Institution. The proposed area of research 
can contribute to new/additional knowledge. 
 
Department of Hotel Management and Catering Technology 
 
Department of Hotel Management & Catering Technology was established in 2019 to prepare a 
successful and fulfilling career in the hospitality industry. Classroom teaching is enhanced by a variety  
of exciting learning experiences that will link with the industry. The aims of the department are to 
impart domain theoretical and practical knowledge that incorporates experimental learning to foster 
requisite skills among students. With its well-equipped training labs, food and beverage production 
Labs, experienced faculty, and culture of innovation that help students to build a career in the tourism 
and hospitality industry. This course will equip with the knowledge, skills and attributes to become an 
effective and ethical manager. 
 
Academic staff 
Dr. Syed Nadimul Haque, Professor & Head 
Dr. Abhishek Kumar, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Deepali Indora, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Anubha Kaura, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Amjad Imam Ansari, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Priyanka Verma, Assistant Professor  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
Bachelors of Hotel Management  
Seats: 60 
Duration: 4 years/ 8 semesters 
Eligibility: Passed 10+2 examination or equivalent in any discipline from a recognized board/ 
Institution with at least 50% aggregate marks. 
Selection Process: The admission to this programme will be on the basis of merit of the first five 
subjects in the qualifying examination.
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
School of Chemical & Life Sciences 
(SCLS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof. Suhel Parvez  
The School of Chemical and Life Sciences (SCLS) has been in existence (as Faculty of Science) 
since the grant of granted of status of a “Deemed to be University” to Jamia Hamdard. Teaching 
activities commenced from the session 1994-95 with post-graduate (PG) programmes. Currently, the 
School consists of six Departments. The School offers Doctoral, Post Graduate and Graduate 
programs of study in the area of Biological, Clinical and Chemical Sciences. Postdoctoral fellows are 
also part of the School and most of them avail prestigious fellowships of extramural funding agency. 
There is a special research centre – Centre for Transgenic Plant Development for research on 
transgenic verities of plants with special focus on medicinal plants. Sophisticated research 
instruments are housed in the Central Instrumentation Facility (CIF).  
 
DEPARTMENTS & CENTRES OF THE SCHOOL OF CHEMICAL AND LIFE SCIENCES 
● Department of Biochemistry 
● Department of Biotechnology 
● Department of Botany 
● Department of Chemistry 
● Department of Medical Elementology and Toxicology 
● Department Translational Sciences and Clinical Research 
 
 
  
Department of Biochemistry 
 
The Department of Biochemistry, SCLS offers PhD, MSc, and BSc (Hons)/ (Hons with Research) 
programs in Biochemistry. This department started MSc Biochemistry in 1994, and more recently 
started BSc Biochemistry, first in an integrated mode and thereafter introduced FYUP from academic 
session 2022-23 in tune with the NEP 2020. An overwhelmingly large number of PhDs have been 
awarded from the department since its inception. Currently, the teaching staff and a number of research 
scholars and post-docs are working in the department on research areas ranging from (but not limited to) 
understanding the biochemistry of human diseases in animal models and cell culture, protein 
biochemistry, drug development and disease mechanisms, host-pathogen interaction, innate Immunity, 
cancer biology and computational biology and bioinformatics. The research and teaching labs are 
equipped with state-of-the-art equipment and infrastructure including the facilities for animal cell 
culture, molecular biology lab and other facilities. The classrooms have an uninterrupted internet and 
power supply and are fully air-conditioned. Overall academic and research ambience is good. In 
addition to the research and teaching labs, the department also maintains a high-end Department 
Instrumentation Facility (DIF) and has access to common facilities such the Computational 
Biology/Bioinformatics facility and the Animal House Facility. 
 
Department of Biochemistry has been a recipient of a number of infrastructure and research grants from 
the Govt, including UGC SAP DRS II, DST-FIST-II, and a large number of EMR grants from ICMR, 
DHR, AYUSH, DBT, DST, CCRUM, ANRF (SERB) etc. to augment research and support teaching. 
Many students have qualified NET JRF and have been awarded other fellowships. Alumni are doing well 
in India and abroad. PG students get opportunities to work for their dissertation both in-house and at other 
institutes, such as JNU, ICGEB, CSIR-IGIB, NII, CSIR-CCMB, CSIR-CDRI, DRDO, BARC and other 
institutes. The alumni are well placed in India and globally. Several of them are working as scientist and 
academicians in government setups including DRDO, CSIR, CCRUM/ AYUSH and various Indian 
universities and abroad, as well as taking up jobs in private sector. 
 
The department has accomplished faculties, nearly all of them having a minimum PhD qualification and 
vast experience as evident by the quality and quantity of publications, patents, and fellowships/awards 
conferred to the faculty. 
 
The syllabus and course curriculum are regularly updated. Department routinely organizes workshops, 
seminars, lectures and conferences where eminent persons from India and abroad participate. Hands-on 
training is imparted to students in contemporary areas to prepare them to undertake cutting-edge research. 
Students are encouraged for creative learning and to deliver lectures/debates on current topics of their 
interest. Students have high rate of success in various competitive examinations and many of the pass outs 
are working in premier institutes and companies in India and abroad. Over 200 students since the first 
batch of the students passed out have cleared various national fellowships which include NET/ NET JRF, 
SRF, GATE, INSPIRE etc. Selected scholarships are also available to the students who take admission in 
Biochemistry.  
 
The department assigns mentors/teachers to small groups of 4-5 students for counselling and helping in 
their day-to-day problems in academic and their careers. Department has zero tolerance for gender bias or 
discrimination on any basis. It has zero tolerance for bullying. Ragging in any form is strictly prohibited. 
 
 
THRUST AREAS 
Diseases biochemistry; Protein biochemistry; Animal models of human diseases; Cell and Molecular 
Biology; Drug development and disease mechanisms; Host-pathogen interaction; Innate Immunity; 
Cancer Biology; Computational biology and bioinformatics. 
 
 
Academic Staff 
 
Prof. Shakir Ali, PhD  
 
            Professor & Head of the Department 
Prof. Rana Zaidi, M Phil, PhD 
 
            Professor 
Dr. Farah Khan, PhD 
 
 
 
Associate Professor (On EOL) 
Dr. Sayeed ur Rehman A Kalam, PhD             Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mohan Kamthan, PhD 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Saurabh Pandey, PhD 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Nikhat Parween, PhD 
 
 
Assistant Professor (Contractual) 
Dr. Neha Chanana, PhD  
 
            Assistant Professor (Contractual) 
Dr. Vikas Sood, PhD 
 
 
 
UGC FRP Assistant Professor 
 
Adjunct faculty/ Fellows 
 
Prof. Faizan Ahmad, INSA Honorary Sr. Scientist 
Dr. Tapan Kumar Mandal, IARI 
Dr. Srinivasan Ramachandran, IGIB (Retd.) 
 
 
Office 
 
Phone no. 011-26059688 (Extension: 5516) (Contact person: Mr. Hifzur Rehman, Office Assistant) Email: 
head.biochemistry@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Undergraduate Programme  
B.Sc. (Hons. with Research) / B.Sc. (Biochemistry) 
Seats: 30  
Duration: 3 Years (6 Semesters) for B.Sc. (Hons) and 4 Years (8 Semester) for B.Sc. (Hons with 
Research) with multiple exit and entry options as per the Four-Year UG Programme (FYUP). 
 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to B.Sc. (Hons.) must have passed Senior Secondary (12th 
intermediate) examination with Biology from CBSE or any other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection procedure: Selection will be through CUET-2025. University may fill up the seats remaining 
vacant after CUET candidates are not available or have very low score as perceived by the Admission 
Committee and approval of the Competent Authority. Vacant seats may be filled based on the marks 
obtained in the qualifying examination in PCB, and/or a written/interview conducted by a duly 
constituted committee to fill up such seats. 
 
Postgraduate Programme 
M.Sc. (Biochemistry) 
Seats: 
20 
Duration: 2 Years (Four semesters)  
Eligibility: Passed B.Sc. in Biochemistry or equivalent examination in Biological/Life Sciences or an 
allied science subject including the allied health sciences securing at least 50% marks in aggregate. 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination (up to 
4th semester for a 3-year programme or up to 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
 
Doctoral Programme 
 
PhD Biochemistry 
Notification for admission to PhD will be published two times a year for Jan-Jun (Cycle 1) and Jul to Dec 
(Cycle 2). Admission will be through an entrance test. 
 
Seats: Variable, depending upon vacancies 
 
Eligibility: Master’s Degree in Biochemistry, or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s 
degree in biochemistry by the corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its 
equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the UGC 7-point scale. 
 
Entrance test will be held for shortlisting the candidates for PhD interviews. NET-JRF/Individual 
Fellowship holders will be preferred and will be exempt from the entrance test, but will have to appear for 
the interview along with shortlisted candidates. Project fellows working in a project will also be required 
to clear the written test to be eligible for the interviews. 
 
 
Department of Biotechnology 
The Department of Biotechnology at Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi was established in 1997 with a vision to 
be recognized as a Department of International repute with a strong interdisciplinary research and 
teaching base in Plant and Animal Biotechnology with active collaboration with industries and health-
care institutions. The Department is supported by FIST (DST, Govt. of India) and SAP (UGC). It offers 
4-Years B.Sc. (Hons.) Biotechnology under FYUP, a 2-Year M.Sc. Biotechnology, a 2-Year M. Tech 
 
Biotechnology and Doctoral research leading to Ph.D. degree in Biotechnology. Besides, the department 
provides opportunities for post-doctoral research. The faculty members of the Department have been able 
to attract a large number of extramurally funded research projects from various funding agencies such as 
DBT, DST, CSIR, ICAR, ICMR, DRDO, UGC, DoEn, ISM&H, CCRUM, and AYUSH.  
M.Sc. students in their final semesters are allowed to do an intensive project work with teachers of the 
department as mentors covering literature survey, benchwork (wet lab), data generation, thesis-writing 
and presentation skills. 
Vision: The Department of Biotechnology at Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi was established with a vision to 
be recognized as a Department of International repute with a strong interdisciplinary research and 
teaching base in Plant and Animal Biotechnology with active collaboration of industries and health-care 
institutions.  
Mission:  
• To create opportunities for multi-disciplinary education, training and research in biotechnology.  
• To provide Biotechnology Educational Program with impetus to generate quality workforce.  
• To create awareness about potentials of Biotechnology with socio-ethical implications.  
• To instill spirit of innovation and creativity in young minds with sound research aptitude.  
• To nurture confident individuals who are effective contributors towards growth of the nation.  
• To establish industry academia partnership and partnership with healthcare institutions for health and 
industry-oriented research.  
• To provide in depth knowledge and practical exposure to students, so that they should qualify national 
exams and go for higher training in National/International laboratories.  
THRUST AREAS OF RESEARCH  
● Molecular biology and regulation of gene expression in infectious and non-infectious diseases. 
● Host pathogen interaction, molecular immunology, molecular virology and drug delivery. 
● Clinical virology and vaccine development. 
● Development of nano-enabled interfaces and multiplexed paper-based diagnostic kits/devices for the 
detection of diseases. 
● Genomics/Proteomics of cancers and development of biomarkers for early detection and valuable 
therapeutic targets. 
● Conservation of medicinally important endangered plants through in vitro approach. 
● Enhancement in the yield of secondary metabolites in medicinal and industrially important crops via 
stress, culture conditions, genetic engineering and genome editing. 
● Development, characterization and evaluation of nano-formulations for the treatment various diseases, 
viz., life style, infectious and cancer etc. 
● Stress biology, mechanism of protein folding and stabilization. 
 
RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE IN THE DEPARTMENT 
Departmental Instrumentation Facility (DIF): DIF is well equipped with basic and advanced instruments 
for training of students and research purpose like Weighing balance, Ice flaking machine, Autoclaves, 
Millipore water system, Centrifuge, PCR, spectrophotometer, Freeze dryer, Ultradeep freezer (-80°C} Real 
time PCR, Rota evaporator, GC-MS, Fluorescence Microscope, UV chamber, Shaking incubator and Ultra-
centrifuge. 
Animal Cell Culture Facility: Animal cell culture facilities are well equipped with CO2 incubators (New 
Brunswick, Shell lab), water bath, cabinets and microscopes. We have one well equipped dedicated cell 
culture facility for students training purpose. The departmental cell culture facility is used by research 
scholars and faculty members. 
 
Plant Tissue Culture facility: A sterile area for media preparation and storage, Laminar air flow chambers 
with HEPA filters, culture room with well-controlled temperature, humidity, air circulation and light 
quality and duration is available for the MSc students and researchers. Besides, Plant Growth Chamber is 
available in the Department. Hardening of in vitro raised plants is done in greenhouse by the researchers. 
BSL-II-B2 laboratory: Our Department also have well equipped BSL-II facility, with Biosafety level- II B2 
cabinet (Haier), CO2 incubator and microscope for infectious disease and clinical studies.  
Confocal microscopy: Our Department is also having functional Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope 
from Leica Microsystem for use of MSc students and Ph.D. Scholars of the Department as well as other 
Department and Schools of Jamia Hamdard. 
Apart from above-mentioned departmental common facilities, each faculty of the department have their 
own well-equipped laboratories required for research purpose. Besides, we are also availing FACS (BD) 
and nano-LC-MS (Waters) facilities available in the University. 
 
CENTRE FOR TRANSGENIC PLANT DEVELOPMENT 
Centre for Transgenic Plant Development (CTPD) as a unit of the Dept. of Biotechnology, was 
established in February 2004 with the research grants of CSIR (TMOP&M), Department of 
Agriculture Cooperation and Farmers Welfare, Govt. of India and inaugurated by Hon'ble Minister of 
Agriculture. CTPD has a mandate for research in the development of transgenic plants with improved 
yield and quality of produce as well as development of DNA based finger prints for authentication of 
traditional medicines. Various labs in the Centre have specialized equipment and facilities to work. It 
is equipped with state-of-the-art facilities to train Ph.D. and postdoctoral students and to carry out 
research in various disciplines of Plant and Microbial Biotechnology. The major R&D activities 
being pursued include cloning and characterization of novel genes linked with tolerance to biotic and 
abiotic stresses and quality traits of medicinal and crop plants, authentication and standardization of 
crude components of herbal formulations and nano vehicle assisted gene delivery in plants. The 
thrust areas of centre also include improving the quality of medicinal crops through genetic 
engineering of metabolic pathway; miRNA and RNA approaches, conservation of medicinal plants; 
developments of easy, rapid, sensitive, cost effective method for aflatoxigenic mold detection in the 
groundnut kernels and soil and identification and quantification of aflatoxins in the food and feed. 
The centre is funded by Jamia Hamdard and other government agencies such as DST, DBT, 
Department of AYUSH, CCRUM, CSIR, ICMR, DRDO etc. for R&D projects carried out at the 
Centre. The consultancy projects from biotech companies are also carried out in the centre. 
The faculty members of the Department have been able to attract number of extramurally funded 
research projects from various national and international funding agencies such as DBT, DST, SERB, 
CSIR, ICAR, ICMR, DRDO, UGC, DoEn, ISM&H, CCRUM, and AYUSH Ministry. 
UGC-Special Assistance Program 
The SAP scheme was initiated in 1963 by University Grants Commission keeping in view the 
recommendations of the Education Commission to facilitate the selected number of University 
Departments having some potential in research and teaching. The programme is intended to 
encourage the pursuit of excellence and teamwork in advanced teaching and research to accelerate 
the realization of international standards in specific fields. The Department of Biotechnology, Jamia 
Hamdard was selected under UGC-SAP (DRS-I) from 2011 to 2016 with a sanctioned amount of Rs. 
65 Lakhs. Again in 2017, seeing the potential in research and teaching, Department of Biotechnology 
recommended to UGC-SAP (DRS-II) from 2018 to 2022 with a sanctioned amount of Rs. 116 Lakhs. 
DST-FIST 
Universities are cradles of innovation and knowledge creation. Research in universities has three-tier 
effects concerned with quality of under-graduate & postgraduate education and value of research. 
 
They are the source of generating high caliber manpower and repositories of national intellectual 
wealth in Science & Technology (S&T) sector, which if channelized properly, may lead to 
socioeconomic development. In the emerging global scenario, India can be an ideal destination due to 
its cost effectiveness and availability of knowledge base. It must also aim for a permanent position in 
the field of Science & Technology. Considering the present status of the S&T sector in the 
universities and related academic institutions who are in dire need for strengthening the existing S&T 
infrastructure support with adequate funding and associated flexibility, Government of India in the 
year 2000 announced a major new initiative titled "Fund for Improvement of S&T infrastructure in 
universities & higher educational institutions (FIST)" to rebuild the Science & Technology 
infrastructure in the country. The quality of UG and PG education and value of research, Department 
of Science and Technology, Govt. of India recommended Department of Biotechnology, Jamia 
Hamdard under DST-FIST (Phase-I) in 2019 and sanctioned an amount of Rs. 80 Lakhs. 
Academic Staff 
Dr. M. Z. Abdin, Professor  
Dr. Humaira Farooqi, Associate Professor & Head 
Dr. Saima Wajid, Associate Professor 
Dr. Javaid Ahmad Sheikh, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Jagriti Narang, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mairaj Ahmed Ansari, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Monica Saifi, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Javed Ahmad, Assistant Professor 
 
Adjunct Faculty 
 
Prof. Niranjan Chakraborty, ICAR-NIPGR 
Dr. K.C. Bansal, former Director, ICAR-NIPGR 
Dr. Rupam Kapoor, University of Delhi 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Undergraduate Programme  
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research) / B.Sc. (Biotechnology)  
Seat: 50  
Duration*: 4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. must have passed Senior Secondary (12th / 
intermediate) examination with Biology/ Biological Studies/Biotechnology/Biochemistry from CBSE 
or any other Board recognized by JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent 
CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in the English and Biology subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination 
 
 
Postgraduate Programme  
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) 
Seats: 
50 [30 General Category + 20 SFS)  
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters)  
Eligibility: 
Passed B.Sc. examination from a recognized University in Biological Sciences/B.Sc. 
(Agriculture)/B.V. Sc with a minimum of 50% marks in aggregate. 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
 
M.Tech (Biotechnology) 
Seats: 
25 [10 DBT, Govt. of India supported + 10 SFS + 05 NRI] 
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters)  
Eligibility: 
Bachelors (B.Tech. in Biotechnology/ Bioinformatics) and Masters (M.Sc./  
M. VSc. /M. Pharm./ Integrated M.Sc.) in any discipline of Life Sciences such as Biomedical, 
Bioinformatics, Biochemistry, Biophysics, Botany, Chemistry, Computational Biology, Genetics, 
Microbiology, Zoology or any other allied areas of Biology/Life-Sciences with minimum 60% of 
marks for Muslim Minority, General, EWS and OBC category. And 55% of marks for 
SC/ST/differently abled candidates in aggregate (or equivalent grade).   
Age Limit: The candidate must not have crossed the age of 28 years on the last date of application 
for the Muslim Minority/General/EWS category. Age relaxation of up to 5 years (33 years) for SC/ 
ST/ Differently Abled/ Women candidates and up to 3 years (31 years) for OBC (Non-Creamy 
Layer) candidates. 
Reservation Policy: For 10 seats supported by DBT, Govt. of India, 50% seats will be reserved for 
Muslim Minority, 30% for General and 10% each for EWS and DA/PwD students. 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the M. Tech. program will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 3rd semester for a 2-year programme or up to 6th semester for a 4-year programme) 
⮚ The candidates admitted under DBT, Govt. of India supported seats must have qualified GAT—B 
Exam, 2025. These candidates will get a monthly stipend of Rs.12000/- per month as per the norms of 
DBT, Govt. of India. 
⮚ The SFS/NRI candidates will be selected through an interview. 
Doctoral Program 
** The notification for admission to the Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April 2025. 
 
Ph.D. (Biotechnology)  
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale. NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for 
 
admissions in Ph.D. programs. (*Equivalence and allied courses may be decided by the committee 
constituted by the Department) 
 
Department of Botany  
The humble beginnings of the department of botany dates back to 1989. Ever since its conception and 
inception, it has come a long way and substantially contributed to the overall growth and 
development of the university. The university department stands prominently and strategically in 
Delhi as one of the two universities offering botany as a specialization at UG, PG and doctorate 
levels, the other being the University of Delhi. The faculty members have made noted contributions 
in academic and research fronts.  
The department offers botany at UG, PG and doctorate levels. The department offers CBCS and as of 
2021, SWAYAM based MOOCs have been adopted into the curricula (both at UG and PG). During 
the last 30 years as many as 109 students have received PhD degree. So far 28 batches of 
postgraduate students have come off with flying colours. The department has been successfully able 
to reach the unreached by offering a Post-graduate Diploma in Environmental Monitoring and Impact 
Assessment through distance mode of learning. The department of botany is the nodal centre for 
offering Environmental Sciences to under-graduate students across various schools of study. 
The Department will be offering a full time Four Year UG Programme in B.Sc. (Forestry) from the 
academic session 2025-26. This programme seeks to acquaint students with the various aspects of 
forestry and its related discipline. The syllabus is very exhaustive, keeping in view the interests and 
demands of industry and other stakeholders such as Ministry of Environment, Forests & Climate 
Change, Govt. of India, Ministry of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare (Govt. of India), UPSC, SPSC, 
Botanical and Zoological Gardens, Biodiversity Parks, Institutions dealing with Science & 
Technology, Environment, Forestry and Biotechnology. 
The graduates of this Forestry programme may find respectable positions of Forest Range Officers, 
Curators, Technical Officers, Scientists, Teaching and Research Personnel, etc. 
Twenty three research projects from various funding agencies including DBT, DST, UGC, AYUSH, 
IPI, CCRUM, have been successfully completed in the department. The department has received 
generous funding under DST-FIST & UGC-SAP (DRS-I) programmes. At present the department is 
receiving a substantial funding from DST-SERB and UGC. 
A modest number of students have been cracking competitive examinations and securing fellowship 
and National Eligibility for selection as Assistant Professors and have been selected in reputed 
institutions such as JMI, Delhi University, AMU, Amity University, IGNOU, Kashmir University, 
NIOS, DRDO, Integral University etc. Besides national institutions, students of Botany department 
have enrolled in Ph.D. programme of International universities. Moreover, students of botany have 
been qualifying the highest level of civil services exams including IAS, IPS, KAS. 
Thrust areas of research 
● Understanding the physiological and molecular mechanisms of abiotic stresses 
● Identification and characterization of medicinal plants and their active ingredients 
● Ethnobotany and plant systematics  
● Tissue culture studies for alkaloid production, clonal multiplication and preservation of endangered 
plant species  
● Identification and characterization of plant viruses 
● Plant anatomy, Environmental pollution, impact assessment of heavy metal, radiation, pesticide 
stress on plants. 
 
 
 
Research Facilities  
The Department has well equipped laboratories for research. The available equipment include growth 
chambers, BOD incubators, refrigerated microfuges, laminar air flow, shakers, environmental shaker 
incubator, double beam spectrophotometer, PCR, high speed cold centrifuge, deep freezer (-20, -80,), 
IRGA (Photosynthesis System), leaf area meters, flame photometer, sliding and rotary microtomes, 
gel documentation system and Nikon phase contrast microscope with photographic attachment, 
weather station attached with gas monitoring sensors, spectrophotometers, chlorophyll fluorometer, 
plant canopy analyzer, rotavapor, sound level meter, gas and dust analyzing system and inverted 
fluorescent microscope among others. A modest green house and net house is also available. 
 
 
Academic Staff 
 
Dr. Shahid Umar, Professor 
Dr. Abdul Mujib, Professor  
Dr. Mahmooduzzafar, Professor & Head 
Dr. Md. Salik Noorani Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Mohd Ashraf Ashfaq, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md Iqbal Raja Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Naushina Iqbal, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Peer Saffeullah, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Sanjay Kumar, Ex Director General of Forests – Professor of Practice 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Undergraduate Programme  
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research) / B.Sc. (Forestry)  
 
Seat: 20  
Duration*:  
4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. must have passed Senior Secondary (12th / 
intermediate) examination with Biology/ Biological Studies from CBSE or any other Board 
recognized by JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in 
aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in the English and Biology subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination. 
 
 
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research) / B.Sc. (Botany)  
 
Seat: 20  
 
Duration*:  
4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. must have passed Senior Secondary (12th / 
intermediate) examination with Biology/ Biological Studies from CBSE or any other Board 
recognized by JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in 
aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in the English and Biology subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination 
Postgraduate Programme  
 
M.Sc. (Botany)  
 
Seats: 30  
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters)  
 
Eligibility: Passed B.Sc. or equivalent examination of a recognized university with Botany/Plant 
Sciences as one of the subjects securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate.  
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
Doctoral Program 
Ph.D. (Botany)  
** The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs  
 
 
Department of Chemistry 
The Department of Chemistry is well known for its excellence in teaching and research. The mission 
of the Department is to provide knowledge in Chemistry that offers opportunities for a 
comprehensive learning experience for students. The Department offers undergraduate and 
postgraduate programme in Chemistry under the new education policy as well as research guidance 
to Ph.D. and Post-doctoral students. 
The curriculum of the postgraduate programme is an outcome of continued, collective and 
collaborative effort with a vision to develop an innovative, responsive, inclusive, flexible, and 
dynamic curriculum in tune with the global educational needs for the 21st century and the national 
education policy 2020. Our curricular structure, courses, pedagogy and assessment have catered to 
 
the development of diversified, integrated, interdisciplinary skills as well as the inculcation of the 
values to survive in the highly competitive and skilled society. 
Advanced level optional courses are also offered at the Ph.D. level. Collaborative research 
programmes with many research laboratories and research institutes in Delhi and outside India are 
also operating very successfully with mutual benefit. The Department has distinguished itself as a 
centre for innovative and pioneering research in a wide range of areas in chemistry interfacing with 
physical and biological sciences. Department has funding from Department of Science and 
Technology (DST), Ministry of AYUSH, WHO, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), the 
Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Defense Research & Development Organization (DRDO), 
University Grant Commission (UGC) etc. The University is also funding the faculty through 
Research Promotion Grants for beginners. 
The students are assigned intensive project assignments on topics of current research interest and are 
exposed to sophisticated instrumental techniques. The exposure gives them the idea of high-quality 
research in their budding stage and makes them grow as world class graduates committed to integrity, 
professionalism and lifelong learning by widening their knowledge horizons in range and depth. With 
Wi-Fi facility in the department and hostel, the students have access to internet, most of the research 
journals and e-contents round the clock.  
Students are prepared for competitive examinations including NET, GATE etc. It helps them getting 
employment in reputed pharmaceutical companies like Sun Pharmaceuticals Ltd. Jubilant Organosys, 
Glenmark, Wockhardt, Rexin, Indian Oil and other allied industries in addition to placements in 
Universities and colleges for teaching and research institutions for doctoral and postdoctoral 
positions. The department also offers a programme in PG Diploma in Chemoinformatic under Open 
and Distance Learning Mode. 
The faculty members with varied expertise are engaged in teaching and research and have a good 
reputation in their respective fields of specialization as evident from their publications in peer 
reviewed journals of high impact factor viz American Chemical Society, Royal Society of Chemistry, 
Wiley lnterscience, Elsevier, Springer Science group and Nature publication. 
 
VISION AND MISSION OF THE DEPARTMENT 
 
Vision: Department aspires to attain global recognition in chemistry education, research and training 
for meeting the growing needs of industry and society. 
 
The mission of the Department includes: 
 
● To make the department a growing centre of excellence in teaching, cutting-edge research, 
curriculum development and popularizing Chemistry.  
● To impart education through a well-defined curriculum driven by the needs of the students, the 
mission of the institution and the program, the standards of the discipline, and the needs of the 
partners. 
● To provide state of art research facilities to generate new knowledge and develop new technologies 
in the thrust areas of chemistry. 
● To develop linkages and collaborations in order to strengthen industry-academia relations for 
mutual benefit and address problems of societal importance 
 
● To outreach in the form of books, online courses, and other Chemistry education activities that 
showcase the role of Chemistry as a central science. 
 
THRUST AREAS OF THE DEPARTMENT 
● Natural products chemistry and natural product inspired pharmacophore development. 
● Medicinal chemistry 
● Anti-cancer agents and anti-inflammatory agents. 
● Anti-hyperglycemic agents. 
● Anti-microbial agents (anti-tubercular, anti-leishmanial etc.) 
● Nano-synthesis and drug delivery. 
● Molecular machines in drug delivery systems. 
● Soft matter and chemistry of nano-bio interface. 
 
Academic Staff 
Dr. Hinna Hamid, Professor & Head 
Dr. Mohd. Samim, Professor  
Dr. Syed Shafi, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Kamla Rawat, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Imran A. Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Najmul Hasan, Assistant Professor  
Dr. G. S. Kapur, Adjunct Professor, Former Executive Director (R&D), Indian Oil Corporation 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Undergraduate Programme  
 
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research) / B.Sc. (Chemistry)  
Seat: 20  
Duration*: 4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. (Hons.) must have passed Senior Secondary 
(12th / intermediate) examination with Biology/ Biological Studies/Mathematics from CBSE or any 
other Board recognized by JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA 
in aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in English and Chemistry subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination 
 
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research)/B.Sc (Material Sciences and Nanotechnology) 
Seat: 20  
Duration*: 4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
 
 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. (Hons.) must have passed Senior Secondary 
(12th / intermediate) examination with Biology/ Biological Studies/Mathematics from CBSE or any 
other Board recognized by JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA 
in aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in English and Chemistry subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection maybe done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination 
 
Postgraduate Programme 
 
M.Sc. (Chemistry)  
Seats: 
30   
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters) 
Eligibility: 
Passed B.Sc. or equivalent examination from a recognized University with 
Chemistry as one of the subjects securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate.  
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
Doctoral Program 
** The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April, 2025. 
 
Ph.D. (Chemistry)  
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs 
 
Department of Medical Elementology and Toxicology  
The Department of Medical Elementology and Toxicology is one of the few Departments in India 
having full-fledged academic programme at Undergraduate/Postgraduate and Doctoral levels in 
Toxicology. The Department has made its mark in toxicological research and has been supported by 
the Department of Science and Technology (DST) through Fund for Improvement of S&T 
Infrastructure in Universities & Higher Educational Institutions (FIST) programme and University 
Grants Commission (UGC) Special Assistance Programme (SAP). Ph.D. degree in Toxicology is 
being awarded in different fields of toxicology. The Department has collaborative programmes with 
many reputed institutes such as Indian Institute of Toxicological Research (CSIR), Lucknow; Central 
Drug Research Institute (CSIR), Lucknow; Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine (CSIR), Jammu; 
Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences (DRDO), New Delhi etc.  
The Department has received funding support from agencies such as Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research (CSIR), Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), Department 
of AYUSH, Department of Biotechnology (DBT), Department of Science and Technology (DST), 
 
Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR), Ministry of Environment and Forests and UGC. Every 
year a good number of students qualify fellowships offered by government agencies. Students who 
have obtained degree in toxicology have got placements in various companies and R&D institutes 
such as Sun Pharmaceuticals Ltd., CDRI, IITR, Dabur, Torrent, Cadila, Lupin, Dr. Reddy's 
Laboratory, Sri Ram Institute of Industrial Research, Nestle, Himalaya etc. The Department’s 
distinguished Alumni as faculty or postdoctoral fellows are spread all over the globe. More emphasis 
is given to develop academic and research skills of the students. M.Sc. programme has integral 
component of dissertation work in the fourth semester. After completion of the course students have 
job opportunities in industry and research organizations. A good number of students qualify NET 
examinations conducted by UGC-CSIR in life science and forensic science streams. The Department 
is fully-equipped with sophisticated equipment to perform research in all major fields of toxicology 
including in vitro and in vivo toxicity studies. 
THRUST AREAS 
● Chemoprevention of cancer by plant products/indigenous medicines and standardization of such 
drugs. 
● Toxic effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs).  
● Stress Biology: Oxidative stress and endophytic stress 
● Neurodegenerative disorders and their protection.  
● Role of trace elements in the manifestation of diseases.  
● Ecotoxicity of environmental pollutants and their interactive effects.  
● Immunotoxicity of drugs and environmental chemicals and its prevention.  
● Molecular mechanism of nanoparticles in toxicity manifestation.  
● Animal models of arthritis for study of mechanism of action of protective agents.  
● Fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) as an alternate model of toxicology 
● Protein assembly and amyloid toxicity 
● Drug discovery against amyloidosis 
● Fabrication of amyloid-based smart materials 
 
Research Facilities 
The Department has well equipped research facilities and laboratories for research in toxicology and 
allied fields. There are following distinct research laboratories for – Molecular Carcinogenesis and 
Chemoprevention, Molecular Toxicology, Molecular Neurobiology, Clinical Toxicology, and Protein 
Assembly. Besides, there are specialized laboratory facilities as Fly Lab, Cell Culture Facility, and 
Neurobehavioural Assessment Facility. All the laboratories and research facilities are equipped with 
equipment and other essential tools. 
Vision 
To impart education and training to young professionals in the field of toxicology, medical 
elementology and forensic toxicology for assessment and mitigation of risk of chemicals and drugs to 
human health and environment.  
Mission 
1. To enable students to develop critical thinking with regard to impact of chemicals on biosphere. 
2. To provide training using state of art tools and techniques to students to assess risk of chemicals and 
drugs to humans at various levels of biological organization and food web. 
3. To train students to the latest development in the field of regulatory framework with respect to use, 
transport, storage and disposal of hazardous chemicals. 
 
4. To expose students to application aspects of knowledge of toxicology, medical elementology and 
forensic toxicology for human welfare and environmental protection.  
 
 
Academic Staff 
Dr. S. Raisuddin, Professor  
Dr. Suhel Parvez, Professor 
Dr. Haider A. Khan, Professor & Head 
Dr. Basir Ahmad, UGC-Assistant Professor  
Dr. Shahzad Ahmad, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mashroor Ahmad Khan, Assistant Professor (Biostatistics) 
 
Adjunct Faculty 
Dr. Rajpal Singh Kashyap, CIIMS, Nagpur 
Dr. Aliabbas Ashfaque Husain, CIIMS, Nagpur 
Dr. Amit R. Nayak, CIIMS, Nagpur 
Dr. Qamar Rahman, CSIR- IITR, Lucknow 
Dr. K.S. Rao, 
Vice-President, Eurofins Advinus, Bangalore 
Dr. Mohammad Akbarsha Abdulkader, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli 
Prof. Zahoor A. Shah, The University of Toledo, Ohio,43614 
Prof. Satya N. Das, Emeritus Scientist, ICMR, New Delhi 
Prof. Basu Dev Banerjee, University of Delhi 
Dr. PV.Mohanan, Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology, Trivandrum  
Dr. Amir Nazir, CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow 
Dr. Pankaj Seth, National Brain Research Centre, N-H, Manesar, Haryana 
Dr. Mohammed Ilyas Mohammed Idris, CSIR-CCMB, Hyderabad 
Dr. Premendra D. Dwivedi, Retired Scientist, CSIR-IITR, Lucknow 
Dr. Mukul Das, Director, Shriram Institute for Industrial Research, New Delhi 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Certificate Course 
Certificate Course in Forensic Toxicology (in hybrid mode) 
Seats: 30   
Duration: 1 Semester (6 months) 
Eligibility:  Bachelor’s degree in Chemistry, Zoology, Botany, Biochemistry, Microbiology, 
Environmental Sciences, Biotechnology, Medicine, Pharmacy, Dentistry or equivalent with at least 
50% or equivalent marks for General/OBC (NCL)/EWS category candidates, and 45% or equivalent 
marks for SC/ST and PwD category candidates. 
Selection procedure: Selection will be on the basis of merit of marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination(s). 
Undergraduate Programme  
 
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research)/ B.Sc. (Toxicology)   
Seat: 20  
 
Duration*: 4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. must have passed Senior Secondary (12th / 
intermediate) examination with Biology from CBSE or any other Board recognized by JH as 
equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in the English and Biology subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates’ selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination. 
 
Postgraduate Programme 
 
1. M.Sc. (Toxicology) 
Seats: 30   
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters)  
Eligibility: Passed B.Sc. with any three of the following subjects: Botany, Chemistry, Zoology, 
Biochemistry, Biotechnology, Microbiology, Environmental Biology or a subject of Life Sciences, 
B.Sc. (Forensic Science)/B. Pharm./B.V.Sc./B.Sc. (Agriculture)/BMLT and other paramedical or 
allied sciences degree securing at least 50% marks  
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
2. M.Sc. (Forensic Science) 
Seats:  15  
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters) 
Eligibility: Passed B.Sc. with any three of the following subjects: Botany, Chemistry, Zoology, 
Biochemistry, Biotechnology, Microbiology, Environmental Biology or a subject of Life Sciences, 
B.Sc. (Forensic Science)/B. Pharm./B.V.Sc./B.Sc. (Agriculture)/BMLT and other paramedical or 
allied sciences degree securing at least 50% marks  
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
Doctoral Program 
** The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April, 2025. 
 
Ph.D. (Toxicology)  
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs 
 
 
Department of Translational and Clinical Research 
The Department of Clinical Research was established in the year 2009 with an objective to train 
human resources in clinical research. In the year 2012 the department was renamed as a Centre for 
Translational and Clinical Research and its activities were expanded by including component of 
translational research. . The Centre was redesignated as Department of Translational and Clinical 
Research in the year 2023. The Department envisages imparting theory and practical training in all 
aspects of clinical research. It provides opportunity to young aspirants who desire to pursue a career 
in expanding healthcare sector in India and abroad. According to industry sources, the clinical 
research industry in India will require a large number of trained professionals in various aspects of 
clinical research in the coming years. Importance of clinical research has got recognition in recent 
years due to commendable growth in domestic pharma industry. Global pharma giants have shown 
interest to conduct clinical trials in India. Moreover, a number of Contract Research Organizations 
(CROs) have been set up in India. These organizations provide support to the pharmaceutical, 
biotechnology, and medical device industries in the form of research services outsourced on a 
contract basis. In view of all this developments demand for clinical research professionals in India is 
growing exponentially. Therefore, personnel involved in clinical research need to be trained in Good 
Clinical Practices (GCP). 
THRUST AREA 
● Efficacy and safety studies of drugs. Rationale use of drugs  
● Conduct of different phases of clinical trials and Bioequivalence studies 
● Epilepsy and neurobehavioral disorder mechanisms and repurposing drugs  
● Neurobehavioral and quality of life assessment in diabetes, chronic kidney disease, cancer 
patients etc. 
● Meta-analysis and systematic reviews on various diseases 
● Nanoformulations against skin cancers and CNS diseases 
 
The Department offers 4 years B.Sc.  (Hons.) Clinical Research under FYUP, 3 year B.Sc. (Hons.) 
Clinical Research, 2 years M.Sc. Clinical Research programme and Doctoral research leading to 
Ph.D. in Clinical Research and Ph.D. in Translational Health Sciences. The study programmes are 
comprehensive based on both course work and hands-on research experience in leading 
pharmaceutical companies, hospitals and clinical research organizations. It is a multi-disciplinary 
study programme to prepare professionals in clinical research with training in the principles and 
methods of clinical research, clinical trials, epidemiology, health economics, biostatistics, bioethics, 
GCP, translational research and application of these principles to clinical trials. The Department has 
established collaboration with Sun Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Max Healthcare Institute Ltd. INCLEN 
Trust Ltd., Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute and other leading clinical research organizations and 
Hospitals for practical and hands-on training of the students. The Department also envisages to 
organize communication skills workshop and regular seminars for the students to train them in 
writing and presenting research data, clinical reports, grant applications and case study reports. 
Students are also provided exposure to Institutional Review Board (IRB) meetings. 
The Department collaborates with leading Hospitals and Pharmaceutical industries to conduct 
research at Post-graduate and doctoral level. 
Placement opportunities for M.Sc. Clinical Research students are very bright. Alumni of the 
Department have been placed in Novartis, Panacea Biotec, Troikaa Pharmaceuticals, Fortis, Jubilant, 
Indegene, IQVIA, Auriga Research Ltd., Max Healthcare Institute Ltd., PPD-Bangalore,  Sun 
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Religare, Totipotent, Baxter, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, Escorts Heart Institute, 
Medanta, Pushpawati Singhania Research Institute (PSRI), AIIMS-Rishikesh and New Delhi, 
 
Translational Health Science and Technology Institute (THSTI, DBT), Jamia Hamdard (in Ph.D. 
programme), BIT, Mesra (in Ph.D. programme) and abroad (Stanford, King’s College, London). The 
students have also qualified NET Examination. The Department has received research grant from 
funding agency like Indian Council of Medical Research. 
Academic Staff 
Dr. Nilanjan Saha, Professor & Head 
Dr. Nidhi, Associate Professor 
Dr. Mohd Ashif Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Rizwana Parveen, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Manoj Kumar, Assistant Professor 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Undergraduate Programme  
 
B.Sc. (Hons. With Research)/ B.Sc. (Clinical Research) 
Seat: 30  
Duration*: 4 Year (8 Semester)/ 3 Years (6 Semesters) (Under FYUP as per NEP 2020) 
*Subject to modifications as per UGC NEP guidelines. 
 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. (Hons.) must have passed Senior Secondary 
(12th /intermediate) examination with Biology from CBSE or any other Board recognized by JH as 
equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET 2025 in the English and Biology subject. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates’ selection may be done on the 
basis of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination 
Postgraduate Programme 
M.Sc. (Clinical Research)  
Seats: 
30   
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters) 
Eligibility: Passed MBBS/ BDS/ BAMS/ BUMS/ B.V.Sc./B.Pharm/ B.Sc. Nursing /BOT/ BPT/ 
B.Sc. Medical Lab. Techniques/B.Sc. with Biochemistry/ Biotechnology/ Microbiology/ Zoology 
/Bioinstrumentation or any other Life Sciences/Allied Health Sciences securing at least 50% marks in 
the aggregate  
 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
 
M.Sc. (Pharmacovigilance)  
Seats: 
10   
Duration: 2 Years (Four Semesters) 
 
Eligibility: Passed Bachelor’s degree in Clinical Research/ Pharmacy/ Medical Science or related 
fields securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate  
 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the qualifying 
examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year programme). 
 
 
 
 
Doctoral Program 
** The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April, 2025. 
 
Ph.D. (Clinical Research) 
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs. 
 
Ph.D. (Translational Health Sciences) 
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the 
UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
School of Unani Medical Education and Research (SUMER) 
 
Dean: Prof. Asim Ali Khan 
 
School of Unani Medical Education and Research (SUMER) has a proud history of providing quality and 
career focused education to the aspiring scholars. Having a very closely-knit professional relationship with 
other scientific discipline experts at the University, with its team of distinguished faculty members, it is 
committed to produce excellent professional leaders in Unani medicine. Here the students are imparted 
with extensive knowledge of the fundamental theories and principles of Unani System of Medicine along 
with the relevant modern medical knowledge of the concerned subjects. 
 
It’s journey dates back to the year 1963 at Gali Qasim Jan, Delhi. It was shifted to the present campus as 
Hamdard Tibbi College in the year 1980. Before merging in Jamia Hamdard as a faculty in 1989, its 
BUMS program of study was affiliated to University of Delhi. This School is one of the premier institutes 
of learning of Unani System of Medicine in India. 
 
Presently, the school offers; 
● Undergraduate degree course i.e. Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery (BUMS)  
● Pre Tib - One year bridge course for students of Madarsa (oriental education) stream for entry into 
BUMS 
● Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
● Post-Graduate course/s (M.D. Unani) in three disciplines viz Ilmul Advia, Moalajat and Tahaffuzi 
 
 
 
wa Samaji Tibb.  
● Ph.D. in Unani Medicine (Ilmul Advia/ Moalajat/ Tahaffuzi wa Samaji Tib) 
 
The School consists of the following fourteen departments: (1) Department of Tashreeh ul Badan (2) 
Department of Manafeul Aza (3) Department of Kulliyat (4) Department of Tahaffuzi wa Samaji Tib (5) 
Department of Ilmul Advia (6) Department of Ilmul Saidla (7) Department of Moalajat (8) Department of 
Mahiyatul Amraz (9)Department of Ilaj bit Tadabeer (10) Department of Amraz-e-Jild wa Tazeeniyat (11) 
Department of Jarahiyat (12) Department of Ain, Uzn, Anaf wa Halaq wa Asnan (13) Department of 
Amraz-e-Niswan wa Qabalat and (14) Department of Ilmul Atfal.  
It has a well equipped attached 100-bedded hospital namely Majeedia Unani Hospital. 
 
Academic Staff 
Department of Moalijat (Medicine) 
 
Dr. Asim Ali Khan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Yasmeen Shamsi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor 
 
 
 
Dr. Azhar Jabin 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor 
Dr. Shazia Jilani  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor 
Dr. Md. Wasi Akhtar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Anzar Alam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Ilmul Advia (Pharmacology) 
 
Dr. Aisha Siddiqui 
 
 
 
 
 
             Associate Professor & Head 
Dr. Rasikh Javaid Nengroo 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sana Rehman  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Tahaffuzi-Wa-Samaji Tib (Preventive & Social Medicine) 
 
Dr. Aisha Perveen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor & Head 
Dr. Mohd. Akram  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor 
Dr. Mo. Usman 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shazia S Shamim 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
 
Department of Kulliyat (Basic Principles of Unani Medicine) 
 
Dr. Asim Ali Khan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Zulnoon Khairuwla  
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Md. Asim Zafar 
 
 
 
 
 
(Guest Faculty) 
Mr. Mohd Shafeeque Alam 
 
 
 
 
 
(Guest Faculty) 
 
Pre-Tib: 
Dr. Ayesha Nadeem 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Pre-Tib Teacher 
 
 
Ms. Hiba Ahmed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Guest Faculty) 
Dr. Sumit  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Guest Faculty)
 
 
Department of Tashreehul Badan (Anatomy) 
Dr. Khursheed A. Ansari   
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Fazlur Rahman 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Manafeul Aza (Physiology) 
Dr. Anwar Hussain Khan  
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Shehla Nazir  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Ilmul Saidla (Pharmaceutics) 
Dr. Asim Ali Khan, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Shahid Shah Chaudhary 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Mahiyatul Amraz (Pathology)  
Dr. Mohd. Maaz  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor & Head 
Dr. Roohi Azam  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Amraz-e-Niswan wa Qabalat (Gynaecology& Obstetrics) 
Dr. Suhail Fatima  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Saman Anees  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sumbul 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Ilmul Atfal (Paediatrics) 
Dr. Uzma Bano 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor& Head 
Dr. Uzma Parveen  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Jarahiyat (Surgery)  
Dr. Minhaj Ahmad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Professor & Head 
Dr. Iram Naseer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Ain, Uzn, Anaf, Halaq wa Asnan (Ophthalmology, ENT and Dentistry) 
Dr. Zehra Zaidi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor& Head 
Dr. Abdul Nasir  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Amraze Jild wa Tazeeniyat (Dermatology and Cosmetology) 
Dr. Umar Jahangir 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor& Head 
Dr. Shoaib Ahmad  
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Department of Ilaj-bit-Tadabeer (Regimenal Therapy) 
Dr. Farkhunda Jabeen 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Associate Professor& Head 
Dr. Sadia Nikhat  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Professor 
 
Majeedia Unani Hospital 
Prof. Asim Ali Khan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chief Medical Superintendent 
Prof. Minhaj Ahmad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Medical Superintendent 
Dr. Ehtesham ur Rahman  
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Medical Superintendent 
Dr. Nusrat Ahmad 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Assistant Quality Manager
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection Process 
 
Admission to UG and PG program of study in this School are subject to the approval of National 
Commission of Indian Systems of Medicine (NCISM). 
 
Kamil-e-Tib-o-Jarahat (Bachelor of Unani Medicine and Surgery)-BUMS 
 
 Seats:  
General: 27 Seats (including 5 seats reserved for pre-Tib pass-outs of Jamia Hamdard) 
SFS and NRI/ Industry Sponsored: 23 Seats 
 
Duration: Five and a half years, including one year (unpaid) compulsory rotatory internship 
Eligibility: A candidate must have (i) passed Senior Secondary (12th Standard/ Intermediate) examination 
with Physics, Chemistry and Biology from Central Board of Secondary Education or any other 
examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent and obtained a minimum of 50% marks taken 
together in Physics, Chemistry and Biology, in case of general category; and 40%marks in case of 
Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. In case of persons with disability 
specified under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016), the minimum qualifying 
marks in the said examination shall be 45% in case of General category, and 40% in case of Scheduled 
Caste, Scheduled Tribes and Other Backward Classes. 
(ii) appeared & qualified in NEET 2025 (as per NCISM guidelines) for further details please refer to 
NCISM website: www.ncismindia.org 
(iii) Candidate shall have passed Urdu or Arabic or Persian language as one of the subjects in the 10th or 
12th standard 
(iv) Candidate who is not covered under point (iii) shall have to study Urdu language along with Arabic 
and Mantiq wa Falsafa (Logic and Philosophy) as a subject during the First Professional BUMS.  
(v) Passed one year Pre-Tib course from Jamia Hamdard (for the Pre-Tib reserved seats) 
Medium of instructions for the program is Urdu language substantiated with English. 
Selection Process: On the basis of merit through NEET-2025 (as per NCISM guidelines) from amongst 
the candidates who have applied for admission to BUMS program of study at Jamia Hamdard  through 
centralized Ayush Admissions Central Counseling Committee. Candidates will be required to appear in 
the centralized counseling conducted by AYUSH Admissions Central Counseling Committee and opt 
Jamia Hamdard under the Deemed Universities Category (https://aaccc.gov.in). Such candidates will be 
required to submit their high school certificate of Urdu / Arabic or Persian language as a subject (in case 
they have already studied), along with their application at the time of admission.  
(for further details please refer to NCISM website: www.ncismindia.org and AACCC website 
https://aaccc.gov.in ) 
Pre-Tib 
Seats: 05 i.e. 10% of total seats of BUMS 
Duration: One year 
 
Eligibility/Selection Process: 
A candidate must have (i) passed Fazil from Madarsa/ Institution recognized by NCISM and must have 
studied Arabic and Falsafa and (ii) appeared in Entrance Test and Counseling as per NCISM guidelines/ 
mandate. 
Note: Candidates who have successfully passed Pre-Tib from Jamia Hamdard shall be eligible for 
admission to BUMS (for further details please refer to NCISM website: www.ncismindia.org ) 
 
LIST OF MADARSAS APPROVED BY NCISM AND THEIR QUALIFICATIONS  
ELIGIBLE FOR ADMISSION TO PRE-TIBB COURSE 
 
S.No 
Name of Institution 
Qualification 
1. 
Lucknow University 
Fazil-e-Adab or 
Fazil-e-Tafseer 
2. 
Darul Uloom Nadvatul Ulma, Lucknow 
Fazil 
3. 
Darul Uloom Deoband, Distt. Saharanpur 
Fazil 
4. 
Al-Jameat-ul-Salfiah, Markazi Darul-Uloom, Varansi 
Fazil 
5. 
Board of Arabic and Persian Examination UP Allahabad or UP Madarsa 
Shiksha Parishad, Lucknow 
Fazil 
6. 
Madarsa Faize Aam Mau Nath Bhanjan Azamgarh,UP 
Fazil 
7. 
Darul Hadees, Mau Nath Bhanian Azamgarh,UP 
Fazil 
8. 
Jameat-ul-Falah, Bilaria Gani, Azamgarh,UP 
Fazil 
9. 
Darul Uloom Ashrafia Misbahul Uloom, Mubarkpur, UP 
Fazil 
10. Jamia Siraiul Uloom, Bondhiyar, Gonda,UP 
Fazil 
11. Jamia Faooquia, Sabrabad,via Shahgani, Distt Jaunpur,UP 
Fazil 
12. Madras University, Chennai 
Adeeb-e-Fazil 
13. Darul Uloom Arabic College, Meerut City,UP 
Fazil 
14. Madarsa Mazahir Uloom, Saharanpur, UP 
Fazil 
15. Government Madarsa-e-Alia, Rampur 
Fazil 
16. Al-Jamiatul Islamia Noor Bagh, Thane Mumbai 
Fazil 
17. Al-Jamiatul Mohammediya, Mansoora, Malegaon 
Fazil 
18. Al-Jamiatul Islamia Ishat-ul Uloom, Akkalkuan,Dhulia 
Fazil 
19. Bihar Rajya Madarsa Shiksha Board, Patna 
Fazil 
20. Jamia-tus-Salehat, Rampur,UP 
Fazil 
 
21. Madarsa-tul-Islah, Saraimir, Azamgarh,UP 
Fazil 
22. Jamia Darus Salam, Malerkotla, Punjab 
Fazil 
23. Khairul Uloom, Al-Jamiatul Islamia, Domaria Ganj, Distt. 
Siddarth Nagar,UP 
Fazil 
24. Madarsa Darul Huda,Yusufpur, Naugarh, Distt. Siddarth Nagar,UP 
Fazil 
25 
 
26. 
 
27. 
 
28.  
Jamia Islamia Almahad Okhla, New Delhi or Jamia Islamia Sanabil, 
Abul Fazal Enclave II, New Delhi 
 Darul Ulooom Arabiyyah Islamia, , Post Kantharia, Bharuch Gujarat 
 
   
 
Darul Uloom Rashidia, Nagpur 
 
Darul Uloom Alimia, Jamda Shahi, District Basti, UP 
 
 
Fazil 
 
Fazil 
 
Fazil 
 
Fazil 
 
      Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
Seats: 10 (inclusive of seats reserved for NRI/Sponsored candidates). There may be additional seats for 
Foreign Nationals 
Duration: 
Two years including three months practical training in Unani dispensary/ Hospital/ Pharmacy/ 
Pharmaceutical Industry. 
Eligibility: 
Intermediate (10+2) qualification in any discipline with knowledge of Urdu 
(OR) 
A candidate must have passed Aalim Examination from a Madarsa/ Institution recognized 
by Jamia Hamdard 
Selection process: Admission to Diploma in Unani Pharmacy will be made through merit in the 
qualifying examination. 
 
Note: Candidates applying for Diploma in Unani Pharmacy are advised to read the list of Madarsa/ 
Boards/ Institution recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
 
  Lateral Entry in Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
 
Aims and Objectives: For providing opportunity of acquiring Diploma level qualification to the passed 
out candidates of one year Certificate Course of Unani Dispenser (CCUD) from Jamia Hamdard. 
Seats: 05 
Duration: One Year (Direct entry to IIyear of Diploma in Unani Pharmacy) 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the lateral entry in II year of Diploma course in Unani 
Pharmacy must have; 
● Completed one year CCUD from Jamia Hamdard 
● Appeared in the Test/ Interview conducted by Jamia Hamdard.
 
 
 
Mahir-e-Tib (MD Unani) 
 
 
Specialization 
Number of Seats 
MD Moalajat  
3 
MD Ilmul Advia 
3 
MD Tahafuzi wa Samaji Tib 
3 
 
Duration: Three years 
Eligibility: Passed BUMS Examination, securing at least 50% marks in the aggregate from Jamia 
Hamdard or from any other University recognized by Jamia Hamdard/NCISM; completed one 
year rotatory compulsory internship; appeared in the Entrance Test 'AIAPGET 2025' and 
subsequent centralized counseling conducted by Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. of India. (for further 
details, please refer to NCISM website: www.ncismindia.org&https://aaccc.gov.in) 
       Note: 
● No stipend is available to the students of MD (Moalajat), MD (Ilmul Advia) and MD 
(Tahaffuzi-wa-Samaji Tib). Depending on the availability of resources, Jamia Hamdard 
may consider providing Hakeem. Abdul Hameed Scholarship to certain deserving 
students. 
● MD Moalajat and MD TST students will be posted in the attached Majeedia Unani 
Hospital of the University as per NCISM mandate. 
Selection process: The selection will be made on the basis of merit determined by the 
performance of the candidates in the entrance test 'AIAPGET 2025' and subsequent counseling 
through Ayush Admissions Central Counseling Committee (AACCC), Ministry of AYUSH, Govt. 
of lndia. Applicants are advised to refer to the official website of Ministry of Ayush -
http://ayush.gov.in; AACCC website https://aaccc.gov.in/ and, www.ncismindia.org and general 
admission guidelines in this prospectus. 
 
      Ph.D. in Unani Medicine 
 
Following is the Specialization and Eligibility criteria for Ph.D. in Unani Medicine 
 
 
 
Specialization  
Eligibility  
Ph.D. Unani Medicine in Ilmul Advia 
M.D.in Ilmul Advia/ M.D.in Ilmul Saidla 
Ph.D. Unani Medicine in Moalajat 
M.D. in Moalajat/ M.D. in Ilaj-bit-Tadabeer/ 
M.D. in Amraze Jild wa Tazeeniyat, M.D. in 
Ilmul Atfal 
Ph.D. Unani Medicine in Tahaffuzi wa Samaji 
Tib 
M.D.in Tahaffuzi wa Samaji Tib 
 
Selection Process: Entrance Test and Interview conducted by Jamia Hamdard (Please refer to Ph.D. 
bylaws of Jamia Hamdard.
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SCHOOL OF HUMANITIES & SOCIAL 
 
SCIENCES (SHSS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof. Syed Mehartaj Begum 
 
This School offers programs in Humanities and Social Sciences. The School consists of the Department of 
Islamic Studies, Center for Federal Studies, Public Policies and Governance, Department of Human Rights 
and Hamdard Institute of International Studies.The School has gradually emerged as one of important 
centres of knowledge offering critical studies in the different dimension of human sciences of knowledge. 
Its strength lies in the promotion of interface studies across disciplines. 
 
Department of Islamic Studies 
 
This is one of the oldest departments set up by the late Founder-Chancellor, Janab Hakeem Abdul 
Hameed Saheb, which later provided the base for establishing Jamia Hamdard in 1989. The department 
is widely known for its original contributions in the fields of Islamic Studies. It offers B.A. (Hons.), 
M.A. and Ph.D. programmes. The B.A. (Hons.) and M.A. programmes have been designed to help 
students to specialize in the domains of Islamic Sciences of Knowledge, besides promotion of 
interdisciplinary understanding especially in the fields of social sciences. The subsidiary and 
compulsory papers of B.A. (Hons.) have been prepared keeping in mind requirements of the present 
times. The purpose is to give a thorough knowledge of contemporary subjects such as Sociology, 
Political Science, Economics, Islamic Economics, Banking and Finance, Computer Applications, 
Arabic and English languages and core subjects like Quranic Sciences, Principles of hadith, various 
civilization and dynasties etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
The M.A. Islamic Studies programme also focuses on issues like Ijtihad, the Islamic position on 
multiculturalism, dialogue between religions and civilizations, knowledge in the Islamic perspective, 
and problems faced by the Muslim community in India and abroad. Teaching of Sufism provides 
exhaustive analysis of peace, ethics, theology, Sufi traditions and orders, Bhakti movements, composite 
cultures, shrines, major writings etc. 
 
The main thrust of research in the Department is in the areas which have critical relevance to the 
contemporary Muslim world with special reference to Indian Muslims. These include subjects related 
to the socio-economic, religious and political problems of Muslims in India, contribution of Muslims to 
different walks of life, issues related to misunderstandings about Islam and Muslims, the impact of 
Islam on India and vice-versa, the contribution of Indian Muslim scholars and noblemen, translations of 
outstanding works by Muslim scholars including Muslim scientists, ulama and sufis. Within the broad 
parameters of the Holy Qur'an and Sunnah, research in Islamic Studies is based on, and guided by the 
modem methodology of knowledge formations. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
 
Dr. Arshad Hussain, Associate Professor & Head 
 
Dr. Safia Amir, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Abroo Aman Andrabi, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Sumaiyah Ahmed, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Ahmed Naeemi, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Syed Mohammad Fazalur Rehman, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Waris Mateen Mazhari, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Najmus Sahar, Assistant Professor 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
B.A. (Hons.) Islamic Studies 
  
Seats: 60 
 
Duration: 4 Years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate must have passed the Senior Secondary (12th Standard/Intermediate) 
examination conducted by the Central Board of Secondary Education, or any other examination 
recognized by Jamia Hamdard. Alternatively, he/she should have passed Alim from state Madrasa 
Board or should have Alimiyah degree from Madrasas recognized by Jamia Hamdard. The candidate 
should have secured at least 45% marks. 
 
Note: Candidates applying for B.A. (Hons.) Islamic Studies are advised to read the list of 
Madrasas/Boards/Institutions recognized by Jamia Hamdard as mentioned in General Information and 
Admission Guidelines. 
 
Selection procedure: Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance Test 
(CUET-2025). Candidate must appear in the CUET in the following subject combination: 
 
Urdu language+General Test 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates’ selection may be done on the basis 
of merit of qualifying examination 
 
M.A. (Islamic Studies) 
  
Seats: 20 (Inclusive of reserved seats for NRI/Sponsored candidates); additional seats are available for 
Foreign Nationals 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
 
Eligibility: 45% marks in aggregate in the Bachelors examination recognized by the statutories bodies 
of India or Fazilat Degree from state Madarsa Board or Madarsa recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
 
Selection process: On the basis of merit determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination (up 
to 4th semester for a 3-year programme), and Interview of the shortlisted applicants. 
 
Ph.D. (Islamic Studies) 
  
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme from session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April 2025. 
 
Eligibility and selection process: Candidates shall have a Master's Degree in relevant , allied, applied 
 
and interdisciplinary fields of studies or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master's degree 
 
by the corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade 'B' 
 
in the UGC 7-point scale. 
 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
 
programs. 
 
List of Recognized Madrasas 
 
The Fazil/Alim degree of the following Madrasas/Boards/Institutions are recognized by Jamia Hamdard 
for admission to B.A. (Hons.) Islamic Studies, M.A. (Islamic Studies) and Diploma in Unani Pharmacy. 
The Alim degree of the following Madrasas/Boards/Institutions are recognized by Jamia Hamdard for 
admission to B.A. (Hons.) in Islamic Studies, Diploma in Unani Pharmacy. 
 
The Fazil degree of the following Madrasa / Boards / Institutions is recognized by Jamia Hamdard for the 
admission to M.A. (Islamic Studies). 
 
"The students having certificates of madrasas recognized by Aligarh Muslim University (AMU) Aligarh, 
Jamia Millia Islamia (JMI) New Delhi, Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU) New Delhi, Maulana Azad 
National Urdu University (MANUU) Hyderabad, CCIM New Delhi and Council of Boards of School 
Education in India (COBSE), Delhi will be eligible for admission to B.A. (Hons.) Islamic Studies, M.A. in 
Islamic Studies and Diploma in Unani Pharmacy Programmes as per the eligibility criteria mentioned in 
the Prospectus 2025-26." 
 
Link of Madrasas Recognized by Jamia Hamdard. 
https://jamiahamdard.edu/UserPanel/DisplayPage.aspx?page=gks 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Centre for Federal Studies, Public Policies and Governance 
   
Our Centre 
● A member centre of the prestigious International Association of Centers for Federal Studies 
(IACFS). 
● Exclusively dedicated to advance studies, researches and teachings on the dimensionalities of 
federal studies, public policy, and politics & governance in national and international settings. 
● Committed to advance alternative paradigms of knowledge relevant to the academic trajectories of 
major knowledge system in the twenty-first century. 
● Dedicated to promote inter/multidisciplinary research and teachings in the applied domain of 
social/human sciences.  
● Known internationally for its original contribution in the fields of federal studies, public policies, 
and political and governance studies. 
● Widely known for reorienting contemporary debates on Indian federalism, Indian politics and 
policies.  
● Centre has been part of almost all major global projects on federalism/federal studies, and has 
distinction of serving major committees and commissions of the Government of India. 
Curriculum Design 
 
 
 
Programmes of Studies, Eligibility and Selection process 
Undergraduate Programmes 
B.A. (Politics and Governance) 
It is a four year research based multi-disciplinary programme of study. Students successfully 
completing four years is awarded B.A. in Politics and Governance (Honours/Honours with 
research). Developed in accordance with NEP 2020, and at the inter-sectionality of the Political 
Science, Governance Studies, Economics, Federal Studies, New Public Management applied sciences 
and other important knowledge systems, the critical strength of this programme is as follows: 
1. 
Unlike conventional Political Science programme focusing more on government, it largely 
deals with new age politics and governance. 
2. 
Being thoroughly inter/multidisciplinary programme, students will be equipped with knowledge 
essential to, and in conformity with the academic and professional priorities of the twenty-first century. 
3. 
Being a critical blend of applied theories and practices, the programme seeks to outdo 
disciplinary regimentation, marked by linearity and excessive textualism and prototyping. 
4. 
Its pedagogy promotes guided self-learning and application of theories in real life situations. 
 
 NEP 
2020 
 
 CUET 
 
 Applied and 
Multidisciplina
ry Courses 
 Skill & Ability 
Enhancement 
 Choice 
Based 
Courses 
 Multiple 
Entry & 
Exit 
 
 Language 
Developme
nt and 
Writing 
Skills
 
 Lateral 
Entry 
 
  Outcome –
disciplinary
, generic, 
research, 
skill etc
 Research 
Promotion & 
advance 
specialisatio
n
 Comprehensiv
e Continuous 
Evaluation  
 
Value 
Education 
 
 Project & 
Dissertatio
n 
 
5. 
Being a research-based programme, students will have significant edge not only in branding 
themselves as subject experts, but also in the professions which they may opt after successful 
completion of the programme. 
6. 
For building students’ competences, a mix of theory, case study and identification of field-
based problems and solutions is followed. Skill development and internship are added features of the 
programme. 
Seats: 60 
Fees: Rs. 25,000/-per annum 
Eligibility: Senior Secondary/intermediate/10+2 examination from any recognized board with 60% 
aggregate marks. 
Selection Procedure: Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025) score in English, General Test and in any one paper of Social Sciences, Humanities, 
Sciences, Management Studies and other system of knowledge. 
In the event of non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates’ selection may be done on the basis 
of merit of first five subjects in qualifying examination. 
B.A.  in Public Policy (Honours/Honours with Research) 
It is a four-year research based multidisciplinary programme of study. The course has been devised and 
designed in accordance with the intent, content and policy design of NEP 2020. Being a 
multidisciplinary programme of study, curriculum has been developed at the inter-sectionality of all 
major systems of knowledge. The programme offers policy specialization from fourth semester 
onwards. Students will be specially trained by policy experts in four core sectors of policy studies (i) 
policy designing and modeling, (ii) policy ecology, (iii) policy evaluation, and (iv) policy alternatives. 
Being a data driven programme of study, students will be encouraged to do field study, write research 
papers and make policy interventions. They will be further encouraged to develop core expertise in 
different fields of public policy in India and other successful policy models of the world. They will 
have added opportunity to develop core specialization in select areas of centre’s much sought after 
programme of study B.A. in Politics and Governance. 
Seats: 40 
Fees: Rs. 25,000/- per annum 
Duration: 4 years 
Eligibility: Senior secondary/ intermediate/10+2 examination from any recognized board with 60% 
aggregate marks. 
Selection procedure:  Selection will be made on the basis of Central Universities Common Entrance 
Test (CUET-2025) score in English, General test and any one paper of Social Sciences, Humanities,  
 
 
Sciences, Management Studies and other systems of knowledge. 
In the event of the non-availability of CUET-2025 qualified candidates, selection may be made based 
on the merit of the first five subjects in the qualifying examination. 
 
Post Graduate Programmes of Study 
One and Two Years Post Graduate Degree Programme: 
(i) 
M.A. in Politics and Governance 
(ii) 
M.A. in Public Policy 
(iii) 
M.A. in Federal Studies 
Salient features of Master’s Degree Programme 
Designed in conformity with NEP 2020, it is an advance study programme. Students will be 
encouraged to do primary research, develop policy and sectors specific expertise. Meta-theorization 
and probability analysis are two mainstays of these programmes. Being an intensive research based 
programmes of study, course structure will have significant content on contemporary disciplinary 
challenges of knowledge. Intensive internship (academic and industry) will be an essential component 
of the programme. Students will be intensively mentored to publish research papers in high impact 
factor journals. Students are expected to write dissertation on field-study basis. Those opting for one-
year master degree programme will have courses on meta-methodology and theory, besides domain 
specialization in select sectors of knowledge. In two years master degree programme, second year is 
exclusively dedicated for writing research dissertation. 
Eligibility for 1 year Master’s Degree Programme 
● 
 A four year bachelor’s degree with honours/ honours with research with a minimum of 160 
credits. 
● 
Students who have done 1 year master’s (2 semester) degree programme of his/her two year master 
degree programme may also join provided if he/she has successfully completed first year of a 
master degree with a minimum of 40 credits course work. 
Eligibility for 2 year Master’s Degree Programme 
● 
3 year/6 semester bachelor’s degree programmewith a minimum of 120 credits. 
● 
Provision for lateral entry in 2 year of master degree programme, provided student has successfully 
completed 1 year (2 semester) of his/her master’s degree programme with minimum 40 credits. 
 
● 
Master’s degree programme is open to all branches of knowledge. 
Fees: Rs. 25,000/- per annum (for 1- or 2-years programme). 
Seats: 10 each in the above-listed master degree programmes  
Selection process: On the basis of merit determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(upto 4th semester for 3 year programme).  
Ph.D. Full time/Part time 
(i) 
Ph.D. in Federal Studies  
(ii) 
Ph.D. in Public Policy 
(iii) 
Ph.D. in Politics and Governance 
Eligibility: Candidates shall have a Master's Degree/a professional degree declared equivalent to the 
Master's degree by the corresponding statutory body with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its 
equivalent Grade 'B' in the UGC 7-point scale or a four year bachelor’s degree with honours/honours 
with research . 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programmes. 
Note: University reserves right to amend eligibility and selection process/criteria from time to time.  
Academic Staff 
Prof. Ajay Kumar Singh, Professor & Head 
Dr. Parvez Hayat, IPS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
Dr. Ravindra Kumar Srivastava, IAS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
Mr. Taj Hassan, IPS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
Dr. Khalid Ansari, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Danish Reza, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Akhtar Ali, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Amisha Thakur, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Javed Azmi, Computer Applications/Statistics 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Department of Political Science and Human Rights 
 
The 
Department 
of 
Political 
Science 
and 
Human 
Rights 
was 
established in 
2022, initially 
as 
the 
Department 
of 
Human 
Rights, with a 
vision 
to 
promote 
scholarly 
inquiry 
into 
governance, 
democracy, and human rights. Over time, the department expanded its academic scope, integrating 
political science to provide a more comprehensive understanding of political institutions, public policy, 
international relations and human rights advocacy.  
The department offers two postgraduate programs: M. A. (Human Rights) and M. A. (Political Science). 
These programs provide students with a comprehensive foundation in political theory, international 
relations, human rights, and international law, ensuring graduates are well-equipped to address 
contemporary socio-political challenges. 
In addition to postgraduate studies, the department offers Ph.D. (Human Rights) and Ph.D. (Political 
Science), providing a platform for advanced research and academic inquiry. The doctoral programs 
emphasise original research, critical analysis, and interdisciplinary engagement, preparing scholars for 
academia, policymaking, and advocacy careers at national and international levels. 
With an interdisciplinary approach, the department emphasises research, policy analysis, and advocacy, 
collaborating with academic institutions, think tanks, and human rights organisations. Our faculty is 
committed to provide an academically rigorous and socially relevant education. Graduates of the 
Department of Political Science and Human Rights embark on diverse career trajectories across academia, 
civil service, diplomacy, non-governmental organisations (NGOs), international organisations, and legal 
advocacy. 
Ultimately, the department aspires to cultivate professionals who will contribute substantively to the 
advancement of democratic values, the pursuit of justice, and the promotion of human dignity in an 
increasingly interconnected world. 
Areas of Advanced Studies and Research 
● Conceptual and Theoretical Framework of Human Rights 
● Globalisation and Geopolitics 
● Legal and Constitutional aspects of Human Rights 
● Discourse of Intersectionality: Caste, Class and Gender 
● Public Health and Human Rights 
● Human Rights in a Globalized World 
 
 
● Ethnic, Indigenous and Minority Rights 
● Migration, Displacement and Refugee Issues 
● Contemporary Scientific Advancements: Information Technology and Artificial Intelligence (AI) 
● Rights of Women, Children, Diﬀerently abled, LGBTQ+ and other vulnerable sections 
● Environmental Politics and Governance 
● Post-colonial International Relations 
● Public Policy and Governance in India 
● Civil Society and Non-state Actors in Politics 
● State and its Institutions 
Academic Staff 
Prof. Syed Mehartaj Begum, Head & Dean 
Dr. Faisal Mahmood, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shazia Parween, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sazid Equbal Akhtar, Assistant Professor 
Mr. Ali Kaif, Assistant Professor 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
Post Graduate Programs 
M.A. (Human Rights) 
The program is designed to cultivate a critical understanding of human rights theories and practices at 
both national and international levels. It uniquely integrates the intellectual strengths of social sciences, 
law, and science and technology. Additionally, students are encouraged to undertake internships with 
National and State Commissions, law firms, leading institutions, and NGOs actively engaged in 
protecting, promoting, and advancing human rights in India. This program also aims, 
● To create awareness about global and national standards for the realisation of Human Rights. 
● To train and sensitise students to take responsibility for promoting and protecting Human Rights. 
● To mainstream the empowerment of women and other groups with special status through training 
and development programs. 
● To contribute to a better environment where the rights of all people are protected. 
Seats: 25 
Duration: 2 Years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 45% marks in aggregate in the any Bachelors examination recognised by the Statutory Bodies 
of India. 
Selection process: On the basis of merit determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(up to 4th semester for 3-year program).  
M.A. (Political Science) 
The course is designed to equip students with the foundational knowledge of politics, covering all relevant 
classical thinkers as much as contemporary scholars. It meticulously blends and coheres the ideas and 
themes from the classical age to contemporary India. The course encompasses theoretical, analytical, and 
empirical approaches to unravelling the domain of ‘political’. It covers both quantitative as well as 
qualitative methods. As such, it will help students with critical aptitude to intellectually engage with the 
issues transpiring in the domain of ‘political’. Embedded in the fine interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary 
spirit of learning, it encourages students to undertake internships in national/international institutions, 
NGOs, Development sectors and other spaces. Specifically, the program aims: 
 
 
● To marry the classical with the contemporary and place the same in lively dynamics, making it 
relevant and utilitarian. 
● To train and sensitise students to take responsibility and respond intellectually to ongoing issues. 
● To especially sensitise the discourses of subalterns, cultivate political compassion and empathy in 
them, and respond accordingly. 
● Train them to nurture democratic ideas, develop a learning culture, and cultivate a democratic 
temperament among students. 
Seats: 30 
Duration: 2 Years (4 Semesters) 
Eligibility: 45% marks in aggregate in the any Bachelors examination recognised by the Statutory Bodies 
of India. 
Selection process: On the basis of merit determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination 
(up to 4th semester for 3-year program). 
Doctoral Programs 
Ph.D. (Human Rights) (Regular/ Part-Time) 
The notification for admission to the PhD programme for the session 2025-26 will be released in the 
month of April, 2025 
Eligibility: Candidates shall have a Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to 
Master’s degree by the corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its 
equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the UGC 7-point scale. 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission to Ph.D. 
programs. 
Ph.D. (Political Science) (Regular/ Part-Time) 
The notification for admission to the Ph.D. programme for the session 2025-26 will be released in the 
month of April, 2025 
Eligibility: Candidates shall have a Master’s Degree in relevant, allied, applied and interdisciplinary 
fields of studies or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by the corresponding 
statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ in the UGC 7-point scale 
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission to Ph.D. 
programs. 
Note: The university reserves the right to amend eligibility and selection process/criteria from time to 
time.
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
Hamdard Institute of International Studies 
 
 
 
The Hamdard Institute of International Studies (HIIS), established in 2021, is a premier academic center dedicated 
to the study of global affairs, diplomacy, and international relations. As a part of Jamia Hamdard University, HIIS 
aims to provide students with a deep understanding of global political, economic, and cultural dynamics while 
fostering interdisciplinary research and critical analysis. 
The institute recognizes the increasing interconnectedness of nations and the growing importance of international 
engagement in today’s world. By offering undergraduate, postgraduate, and doctoral programs, HIIS prepares 
students for careers in diplomacy, international organizations, policymaking, global business, and academia. The 
curriculum is designed to provide both theoretical knowledge and practical experience, ensuring that students 
develop analytical, research, and communication skills crucial for success in the field. 
HIIS focus on research-oriented learning, encouraging students to explore contemporary global challenges, from 
climate change and human rights to international trade and security. The programs also emphasize the role of India 
in global politics, equipping students with insights into the country’s foreign policy, international alliances, and 
diplomatic 
strategies. 
Furthermore, HIIS promotes a multicultural learning environment, attracting students and faculty from diverse 
backgrounds. Through guest lectures, workshops, international collaborations, and study-abroad opportunities, 
students gain real-world exposure and a global perspective. 
With a commitment to academic excellence and innovation, the Hamdard Institute of International Studies aspires 
to be a leading hub for international studies in India and beyond, shaping future leaders who can contribute 
meaningfully to global peace, cooperation, and development. 
 
Areas of Advance Studies and Research  
 
∙ Comparative Politics  
∙ Great Power Politics  
∙ History of International Politics  
∙ South Asian Studies  
∙ India’s Foreign Policy  
∙ Globalization and Global Governance  
∙ Peace and Conflict Studies  
∙ United Nations  
∙ Regional and Security Organizations 
∙ International Law and International Security  
∙ Regional Politics including West Asia and Africa  
∙ International Political Economy 
 
 
 
 
 
Academic Staff 
Prof. (Dr.) Syeedun Nisa, Professor & Director  
Prof. Amrit Lugun, Professor of Practice 
Dr. Ravindra Kumar Srivastava, IAS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
Dr. Ariba Jalal, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Asif Nawaz, Assistant Professor  
Mr. Shivam Bahuguna, Assistant Professor 
Prof. Vijayalakshmi Brara, Visiting Professor 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process  
 
Post Graduate Course 
  
M.A. International Studies  
 
M.A. in International Studies is a full-time two-year Master’s degree programme. It combines studies in 
International Affairs, Area Studies, International Organization, Comparative Politics and International 
Political Economy, enabling students to develop critical scholarship in the fields of international studies.  
Seats: 30 
Duration: 2 Years  
Eligibility: 45% marks in aggregate in the any Bachelors examination recognized by the Statutory Bodies 
of India.  
Selection process: On the basis of merit determined by marks in the respective qualifying examination. 
 
Under Graduate Course 
  
B.A. (International Studies and Global Policy) 
 
The undergraduate program offered by the Hamdard Institute of International Studies encompasses 
comprehensive four-year duration, spanning eight semesters. It presents a holistic perspective, cultivating 
interdisciplinary expertise, and honing essential skills in cultural awareness, problem-solving, and effective 
communication, aligning with the mandates delineated in the National Education Policy of 2020. 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 4 Years  
Eligibility: successfully completed the Senior Secondary (12th/Intermediate) examination within the 
relevant academic stream from CBSE or any other Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard (JH) as equivalent. 
The candidate should secure a minimum of 50% marks or an equivalent Cumulative Grade Point Average 
(CGPA) in the aggregate. 
Selection process: The admission process will be contingent upon the merit attained in the Central 
University Entrance Test (CUET-2025) or marks obtained in senior secondary examination.  
Ph.D. in International Studies  
Eligibility: Candidates shall have a Master's Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to 
Master's degree by the corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent 
Grade 'B' in the UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. 
programs.  
Note: University reserves right to amend eligibility and selection process/criteria from time to time
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research 
(HILSR) 
 
 
Dean: Prof. (Dr.) Saleena K. Basheer 
 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (HILSR), was established in 2018 by the approval of 
the Bar Council of India (BCI). HILSR offers BA.LL.B. a five-year integrated degree programme; two-
year LL.M programme with specialization in Constitutional Law, and Commercial Law (20 intake 
each); and Ph.D. programme. HILSR has made significant progress since its inception. The faculty 
members have outstanding academic qualifications and experience in order to facilitate quality teaching 
and learning. HILSR is committed to high academic standards, innovative pedagogy and industry linked 
global curriculum. We are adequately equipped with modern infrastructure such as a well-stocked 
library with online databases, smart classrooms, computer lab, Moot Court Hall, Seminar Hall, and 
Students Common Rooms. Legal Aid Clinic and Legal Literacy Club in collaboration with Delhi State 
Legal Service Authority (DSLSA) has been established to cater to the needs and to promote welfare of 
the underprivileged of the society. Constitutional Club, ADR Board, Moot Court Committee, Pro Bono 
Club, Readers’ Club, Debate Club, Cultural Club in HILSR enable students to avail the opportunities to 
explore new avenues in both academic and extra-curricular arenas. Our vision is to attain excellence in 
the field of legal education of global standard through fostering excellence in learning, research, 
collaboration, community service and capacity building, along with nurturing socially responsible 
individuals and organizations so as to shape a better future for humanity. 
 
 
 
 
 
Mission: 
● To encourage global perspective in legal education through curriculum, research and collaboration. 
● To promote intellectually-engaging, problem-solving, community service and hands-on training, and 
learning environment. 
● To engage in capacity building training and research for individuals and institutions of social, legal 
and economic importance. 
● To create a culture of ethics, good practices and responsible persons and professionals with 
humanitarian values. 
 
Aims & Objectives: 
The aim of HILSR is to evolve and impart comprehensive legal education at all levels to achieve 
excellence by organizing advanced studies, training and the promotion of research in all branches of law 
and allied subjects. The objectives are:  
● To propagate substantial and procedural legal knowledge and skill development by focusing on 
holistic and interdisciplinary pedagogical global standards.  
● To promote critical thinking, progressive outlook, legal and ethical values, and the rule of law as 
enshrined in the Constitution of India.  
● To encourage collaboration with institutions of national and global importance. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
Dr. Saleena K. Basheer, Professor and Dean 
Dr. Ashok Kumar Mishra, Professor of Practice 
Mr. Burhan Majid, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Mehar Fatima, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Angbin Yasmin, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Ayan Guha, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Sadaf Fatima, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Naazish Fatima, Assistant Professor  
Mr. Ishan Ahmad, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Naheed Mustafa, Assistant Professor  
Mr. Md. Tabish Eqbal, Assistant Professor  
Dr. Abhishek Gupta, Assistant Professor  
Ms. Varsha Gulaya, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Iram Khan, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Samreen Warsi, Assistant Professor  
Mr. Jahangir Badar, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sajid Hamid, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Vijay Kumar, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Zafrul Hassan, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Mohd. Shahzad, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Shariqa Mehmood, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Shivani Johri, Assistant Professor 
Ms. Hina Kausar, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Kulsum Haidar, Assistant Professor 
Adv. Amit Sanduja, Visiting Faculty  
Adv. Sandeep Kumar, Visiting Faculty 
Dr. Amrutha Rahim, Visiting Faculty 
Mr. Thwayib. R, Visiting Faculty 
Ms. Lubna Tanweer, Visiting Faculty 
 
 
 
Ms. Sneha Arora, Visiting Faculty 
Ms. Shubhra Khanna, Visiting Faculty 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
Undergraduate Programme:  
BA. LL.B. (Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Law) 5 Years Integrated Course 
 
Seats: 120 + 60* 
Duration: 5 Years 
Eligibility: A Candidate must have passed 12th (10+2) standard examination from any government-
recognized board with a minimum of 45% marks in aggregate. 
Selection Process: Selection to B.A. LL.B. Degree programme will be based on merit in CLAT 2024. 
Non-CLAT candidates may also apply, however CLAT candidates will be preferred. Non-CLAT 
applicants may be considered only if a suitable number of CLAT-2024 candidates are not available, or 
there is delay in CLAT result. If a situation arises, Non-CLAT applicants will be selected on the basis of 
merit in the first five subjects in the qualifying examination. 
* subject to the approval of the BCI 
Postgraduate Programme: LLM (Master of Laws)  
 
Specialisation:                                                             No. of Seats 
Constitutional Law                                                       20  
Commercial Law                                                          20 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
Eligibility: A Candidate must have passed three years LL.B. programme after graduation or five years 
Integrated Law Degree Programme as recognized by the Bar Council of India with minimum 50% 
marks in aggregate. Those who have appeared in the aforementioned exam and the result is awaited can 
apply for this programme. However, admission shall be subject to the fulfilment of eligibility criteria at 
the time of admission. 
Selection Process: Selection to LLM Degree programme will be based on merit in CLAT 2024. Non-
CLAT candidates may also apply, however CLAT candidates will be preferred. Non-CLAT applicants 
may be considered only if a suitable number of CLAT 2024 candidates is not available, or there is delay 
in CLAT result. If a situation arises, Non-CLAT applicants will be selected on the basis of merit in the 
qualifying examination. 
Professional Programme: LL.M. (Week-end Programme) 
Seats: 40 
Duration: 1 Year 
Programme Structure: There shall be four core papers in first semester and four specialization papers 
in second semester. Specialization shall be offered in Constitutional Law and Commercial Law.  
 
Eligibility: A Candidate must have passed three years LL.B. programme after graduation or five years 
Integrated Law Degree Programme as recognized by the Bar Council of India with a minimum of 50% 
marks in the qualifying examination and has a professional experience of at least two years or has been 
in service in a government or non-government undertaking/institution for at least two years.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Doctoral Programme: Ph.D. (Law) 
 
Eligibility: A Candidate must have passed Masters in Law (LL.M.) with at least 55% marks in the 
aggregate or equivalent grade from any institution recognized by UGC. NET-JRF /Individual 
Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. programme. 
Admission to Ph.D. programme shall be as per Jamia Hamdard Ph.D. Ordinance 2021. 
 
HILSR has the distinction of the following infrastructure and facilities: 
● Smart Classrooms 
● Moot Court Room 
● Seminar Hall 
● A well-stocked library and online databases 
● Computer Lab  
● Legal Aid Clinic and Legal Literacy Club Hall 
● Common Rooms: (a) 1 Boys (b) 1 Girls  
● Internship and placement assistance  
● Research work, moot court, workshops, seminar, conferences, value added courses, etc.  
 
HILSR has various student committees, such as:  
 
1. Legal Aid Committee 
It aims to train the students about the practical aspects of Advocacy by facilitating interaction with 
those who need legal assistance; promoting client counselling and mediation, etc. The object is to 
provide free legal assistance to the underprivileged people of the society. 
 
2. Alternative Dispute Resolution Board 
Alternative Dispute Resolution Board was inaugurated on September 22, 2022. The Board aims to 
encourage the use of alternative dispute resolution means such as Mediation, Arbitration, 
Negotiation and Conciliation among the legal and non-legal professionals, students and general 
public at large to promote peace and harmony. 
3. Moot Court Committee 
The Committee promotes and encourages the mooting culture in students. It trains them to 
participate in National and international Moot court competitions by guiding them in research and 
oral advocacy. 
 
4. Debate Club 
On September 29, 2022, the Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (HILSR) launched its 
Debate Club in the Hakeem Abdul Hameed Auditorium, Jamia Hamdard. The aim of the club is to 
foster and develop the practice of debating skills. 
5. Internship and Placement Committee 
The Committee assists the students in pursuing internships during their semester break in summers 
and winters. It aims to broaden the horizon of career opportunities for the students. 
6. Centre for Constitutional Law Studies (CCLS@HILSR) 
The Centre aims to foster an in-depth understanding of the Constitution of India. CCLS encourages 
law students, research scholars, professionals, academicians, practitioners to connect for advocating 
research in constitutional law with special focus on rule of law, constitutional morality, gender 
justice, progressive constitutionalism and others. 
 
 
 
7. Readers’ Club 
The objective of the Club is to improve reading fluency and develop better writing skills. It aims to 
enhance the quality of thought process amongst the students by adding various dimensions to it. 
 
8. HILSR Pro Bono Club 
HILSR Pro Bono Club has been established under the Nyaya Bandhu (Access2Justice) program of 
the Law Ministry. The HILSR Pro Bono Club at Jamia Hamdard is a student-driven initiative 
dedicated to providing pro bono legal assistance to underserved communities. Committed to 
promoting social justice, the club engages in various outreach programs, legal clinics, and 
awareness 
campaigns. 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SCHOOL OF INTERDISCIPLINARY SCIENCES 
AND TECHNOLOGY (SIST) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Dean: Prof. A. Selvapandiyan  
 
The School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (SIST) promotes education and research in 
interdisciplinary sciences and provides opportunities to researchers and academicians to interact with 
the faculty and students of other schools of Jamia Hamdard and carry out research in interdisciplinary 
areas as well as promote opportunities for higher education in identified areas. The school is running 
two departments namely Department of Food Technology (DOFT) and Department of Molecular 
Medicine (DMM). The school is currently offering B. Tech. and M. Tech. in Food Technology; M.Sc. 
in Nutrition and Dietetics, M.Sc. & B.Sc. Biomedical Sciences and M.Sc. Medical Virology; Ph. D. in 
Food Technology, Bio-informatics, Chemo-informatics and Molecular Medicine. The school is also 
offering One month training in Molecular    Biology. SIST has entered into collaboration with URDIP 
(CSIR), Pune and has established a very strong Ph.D. program in the area of Bioinformatics in place. 
School is offering unique programs like Ph.D. in Interdisciplinary Sciences in which candidates can 
register with any of the eligible supervisor of University irrespective of department, however Ph.D. will 
be awarded to the candidate through SIST from the department in which he/she is eligible for getting 
Ph.D. admission as well as Ph.D. in Traditional Indian Medicine from Center of Excellence in Unani 
Medicine.  
Department of Molecular Medicine:  
 
The mission of DMM is to develop a multidisciplinary approach via successful collaborations to bridge 
the gap between basic and clinical or translational sciences in India. Scientists at DMM are involved in 
scientific programs that try to integrate laboratory and clinical research, to develop new and innovative 
therapeutic modalities with an active interest in disease intervention strategies and assay development 
for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. 
DMM Scientists, trained in reputed laboratories in the USA, are former faculties or employees of 
prestigious international organizations like US-FDA, NIH. Johns Hopkins, etc. After returning to India, 
they have established their labs in Delhi by securing generous funding from multiple government 
agencies (DBT, DST, and ICMR etc). They have proved their credentials to the government funding  
 
agencies and scientific organizations through their publications, patents and grant evaluations. 
Research Areas: Diagnostics; Genetics; Cell biology; Development of point of care devices in 
diagnostics; Virology; Vaccinology; Cancer Biology; Neurobiology. For the detail of research areas 
please visit our (Department of Molecular Medicine under the School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and 
technology of the University) web site. Under each faculty member's profile, you may find information 
about their specialized research area. You can also look for the publications of the faculty members on 
PUBMED, Google scholar, ORCID. 
Facilities: The SIST is well equipped with processing and analytical equipment. A List of some major 
equipment available with department and University are as follows: HPLC, Texture Analyser, 
Rheometer, Hunter Lab Color Spectrophotometer, UV-Vis Spectrophotometer, Motic Inverted 
Microscope, Deep Freezer, Moisture analyser, BOD Incubator, Rotary Vacuum Evaporator, Biohazard 
Safety Cabinet, Lab. Scale Spray Drier, Tray Drier, Fluidized Bed Drier, Oven, Meat Processing Unit, 
Bakery lab, Food Juice Processing Equipment, Packaging Equipment, Hammer Mill, Ball mill, 
Laboratory Pasteurizer, Shrink Packaging Machine, Vacuum Packaging Machine, RT-PCR, Confocal 
Microscopy, ELISA, Fluorescence RT-PCR, Viscometer, Infra-red moisture meter etc. 
 
Academic Staff 
Prof. (Dr.) Angamuthu Selvapandiyan, Professor  
Dr. Surajit Ganguly, Associate Professor  & Head 
Dr. Anuja Krishnan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sonam Grover, Assistant Professor (UGC-FRP)  
Dr. Prem Prakash, Assistant Professor (UGC-FRP)  
Dr. Meetu Agarwal, (DST-Inspire Fellow Faculty) 
 
Adjunct Professors 
Prof. Nirmal Kumar Ganguly, Global Health Strategies, New Delhi 
Prof. Nadira Karunaweera, University of Colombo, Colombo, Sri Lanka 
Prof. S.K. Sharma, AIIMS, New Delhi 
Dr. Hira Nakhasi, FDA, Silver Spring, MD USA 
 
Adjunct Faculties 
Dr. Akhil Varshney, Dr. Shroff's Charity Eye Hospital, Delhi 
Dr. Anil Tiwari, Dr. Shroff's Charity Eye Hospital, Delhi 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Under-Graduate Program 
B.Sc. (Biomedical Science)  
Seats: 20  
Duration: 4 Years  
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the B.Sc. program must have passed Senior Secondary 
(12th/intermediate) examination with Biology/Life Sciences related subjects from CBSE or any other 
Board recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent 
CGPA in aggregate.  
 
 
Selection process: Selections will be through CUET 2025 as well as from the pool of applicants 
on the basis of merit, if the CUET results are delayed. 
 
Postgraduate Program 
 
M.Sc. (Biomedical Science)  
Seats: 20  
Duration: 2 years (Four Semesters)  
Eligibility: Bachelor’s degree in Biomedical Science/Life Science/Zoology/ Microbiology/ 
Chemistry/Biochemistry/Environmental/Biology/Biotechnology/Botany/Toxicology/Clinical Sciences/ 
Laboratory Techniques/ B. Pharm with at least 50% marks in the aggregate from Jamia Hamdard or 
any other examination recognized by the University or equivalent thereto.  
 
Selection process: On the basis of merit of the qualifying examination. 
  
M.Sc. Microbiology (in collaboration with Department of Biochemistry, SCLS) 
The M.Sc. Microbiology program at Jamia Hamdard will be offered jointly by the Department of 
Biochemistry, SCLS and Department Molecular Medicine, SIST as resolved in the 48th (Emergent) 
meeting of the Academic Council. The programme, in tune with the UGC guidelines and as envisaged 
by the NEP 2020, will offer three categories of courses: (1) Core Courses (15 mandatory courses), (2) 
Elective Courses (Any two, one each from General Electives and Discipline Centric Electives in 
Semester II and III), (3) Research-based course (Dissertation, 24 Credits), to be offered as one of the 
Core Course in Semester IV. The courses have been designed to include classroom teaching and 
lectures, laboratory work, project, seminars, assignments, etc. Each course will be of three, four, or 
eight credits per week as per the requirement and shall include laboratory courses. Elective Courses 
will be of two credits each. The student will be required to accumulate a total of 92 Credits in two years 
to fulfil the requirement of a Master’s Degree in Microbiology.  
Seats:  
 
 
20 
Duration of the program: 
02 Years (Four Semesters) 
Eligibility: Must have passed B.Sc. in Microbiology, Biochemistry, Biotechnology, or an allied 
discipline in life sciences under 10+2+3 System, or have exited BSc under FYUP after successfully 
completing six semesters from a recognized university securing at least 50% marks in aggregate in the 
qualifying examination. 
 
Selection Procedure: Selection for a 2-Years MSc Microbiology will be based on the merit in the 
qualifying examination.  
 
Program coordinator: Dr. Mohan Kamthan, Department of Biochemistry, SCLS 
 
Offering Departments/School: Department of Biochemistry, SCLS and Department of Molecular Medicine, 
School of Interdisciplinary Sciences 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ph.D. (Molecular Medicine)  
 
Eligibility: Candidates having passed M.Sc. in any branch of Life Sciences, M. Tech (Biotechnology) 
or any other related qualification with minimum of 55% marks or equivalent grade from a recognized 
University/Institute.  
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/ Project Fellows will be preferred for admission in the Ph.D. 
programs.  
 
 
 
 
Ph. D. (Interdisciplinary Sciences)  
In areas where the nature of work is interdisciplinary, demanding expertise from different disciplines. 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard  
 
Eligibility: Master’s degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s Degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade B in the 
UGC 7 point scale.  
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission in the  
Ph.D. Programs.  
 
Ph.D. (Bioinformatics)  
In collaboration with School of Engineering Sciences and Technology (SEST)  
Eligibility: Candidates having passed M.Sc. in any branch of Life Sciences, M. Tech (Biotechnology) 
or any other related qualification with minimum of 55% marks or equivalent grade from a recognized 
University/Institute.  
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/ Project Fellows will be preferred for admission in the Ph.D. 
programs.  
 
 
Ph.D (Nanomedicine and Nanobiotechnology): 
 
 
•Eligibility: 
◦ Master’s degree or a professional degree equivalent to a Master’s, as recognized by 
the statutory body, with at least 55% aggregate marks or its equivalent Grade ‘B’ on 
the UGC 7-point scale. 
 
◦ Preference 
will be given to 
candidates 
holding NET-JRF qualifications, 
individual 
fellowships, or project fellowships. 
 
 
Ph. D. (Chemo informatics)  
In collaboration with Department of Chemistry, School of Chemical and Life Sciences (SCLS)  
In areas where the nature of work is interdisciplinary, demanding expertise from different disciplines.  
Eligibility: Master’s degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s Degree by the 
corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade B in the 
UGC 7 point scale.  
 
 
 
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission in the  
Ph.D. Programs. 
 
 
The Schoolof Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (SIST) promotes education and research in 
interdisciplinary sciences and provides opportunities to researchers and academicians to interact with the 
faculty and students of other schools of Jamia Hamdard and carry out research in interdisciplinary areas as 
well as promote opportunities for higher education in identified areas. The school is running two 
departments namely Department of Food Technology (DOFT) and Department of Molecular Medicine 
(DMM). The school is currently offering B. Tech. and M Tech. in Food Technology; MSc in Nutrition 
and Dietetics, Biomedical Science (MBS) and Medical Virology; Ph. D. in Food Technology, and 
Molecular Medicine. DMM will be offering a new B.Sc. course (integrated) in Biomedical Science 
(BMS) from Academic Year 2025-26 with an opportunity to transition to the M.Sc. programme in MBS. 
SIST has entered into collaboration with URDIP (CSIR), Pune and has established a very strong Ph.D. 
program in the area of Bioinformatics in place. School is offering unique programs like Ph.D. in 
Interdisciplinary Sciences in which candidates can register with any of the eligible supervisor of 
university irrespective of department, however Ph.D. will be awarded to the candidate through SIST from 
the department in which he/she is eligible for getting Ph.D. admission as well as Ph.D. in Traditional 
Indian Medicine from Center of Excellence in Unani Medicine. 
 
DEPARTMENT OF FOOD TECHNOLOGY 
  
Food Technology is a branch of science in which knowledge of food science is applied in 
manufacturing and preservation of food products. Food Technologists study the chemical, physical and 
microbiological make-up of the food and are involved in its processing, preservation, packaging and 
storage in safe, wholesome and nutritious form. The demand for professionals and trained personnel in 
the food industry as well as in research and development in government and industrial setup is 
immense and ever growing. The Food Technology program at Jamia Hamdard aims: To produce 
professionally competent, proficient and highly skilled personnel in the field of food technology, with a 
knowledge of various aspects of food science and technology including the quality of raw material, 
packaging standards and methodology, health and hygiene parameters, processing techniques, storage 
and food value; To impart technical and techno-managerial skill to the unemployed youth and the 
agrarian society; To promote R&D in the field and assist in the implementation of the food processing, 
safety and quality management of the food regulating bodies like FSSAI, BIS, ISO, CODEX. 
 
DOFT in the school received a substantial grant of Rs. 75 lakhs in 2010 from Ministry of Food 
Processing Industries to strengthen the laboratories and infrastructure of the Department. As the 
demand of professionals and trained personnel in the food industry as well as in research and 
development in government and industrial set-up is immense. The department has funding for research 
projects from UGC, AICTE, SERB etc. The Department of Food Technology has received a grant of 
1.5 Crore Rupees under DST-FIST program. 
 
Major Placements: Tifany, Fitbakes, Nestle, IFFCO, TagTaste, Intertek, Tuv-Sud, Haldiram, Mother 
Dairy, Britannia, Danone, Heinz, Kellogg's, Cadbury, Kraft Food, Hind Agro Foods, Duke Food, 
Pepsico, AVON, Symrise etc. 
 
Research Areas: Food Fortification; Edible films; Probiotics; Nanotechnology; Phytochemicals; Food 
safety and hazards; Food and Drug Interactions, Food Rheology, Powder Technology, 
Pharmacokinetics, Functional Foods, Clinical Nutrition. 
 
 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
 
Dr. Sayeed Ahmad, Professor & Head 
 
Dr. Kulsum Jan, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Vasudha Sharma, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Khalid Bashir, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Sweta Joshi, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr Sadia Chisty, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr Bushra Shahida, Assistant Professor 
 
Er. Jinku Bora, Assistant Professor 
 
Dr. Aastha Bhardwaj, Lecturer 
 
Er. Sohaib Hasan, Guest Faculty 
 
Adjunct Faculties 
 
Prof. Muthukumarappan (Professor South Dakota State University) 
 
Dr. Dilip Ghosh (Director Nutriconnect, Australia) 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
B. Tech. (Food Technology) 
  
Seats: 30 
 
Duration: 4 Years 
 
Eligibility: A candidate seeking admission to the program must have passed Senior Secondary 
(12th/intermediate) examination with Mathematics/Biology from CBSE or any other Board recognized by 
JH as equivalent thereto, securing at least 50% marks or equivalent CGPA in aggregate. 
 
Selection process: Selection will be based on the merit in Paper-I of JEE (Main) 2025/NEET 2025. Non-
NEET& Non JEE candidates may also apply; however, NEET & JEE candidates will be preferred. Non-
NEET& Non JEE applicants may be considered only if suitable number if suitable number of NEET/ JEE-
2025 are not available or there is delay in NEET/JEE result. If situation arises, Non-NEET/Non JEE 
applicants will be selected on the basis of merit of the qualifying examination. 
 
Allocation of seats for NEET/JEE candidates will depend upon the number of application received 
under a category (NEET/JEE or PCM/PCM stream). 
 
M. Tech. (Food Technology) 
 
 
Seats: 25 
 
Duration: 2 Years 
 
Eligibility: B. Tech. in Food Technology/Dairy Technology/ Agriculture Engineering/ Chemical 
Engineering/ Biotechnology/ Mechanical Engineering or M.Sc. in Food Science/Chemistry/ 
Biochemistry or allied disciplines or B. Pharma. with at least 55% marks in aggregate. 
 
Selection process: Merit of the qualifying examination (up to 2nd Semester for 2 years programme or 
up to 4th Semester for 3 years programme and up to 6th Semester for 4-year course). 
 
 
  
 
M. Sc. (Nutrition and Dietetics) 
 
 
Seats: 30 
 
Duration: 2 years 
 
Eligibility: Graduation in a relevant discipline, such as Home Science, Nutrition or Dietetics, Food 
Science, Biology, Microbiology, Clinical Biochemistry, Life Sciences, BNYS (Naturopathy), BAMS 
(Ayurveda), BUMS (Unani) and B. Sc Nursing or other Allied Sciences with a minimum aggregate 
score of 50% at the level of graduation. 
 
Selection procedure: Merit of qualifying examination 
 
M. Sc. (Food Science) 
 
 
Seats: 25 
 
Duration: 2 years 
 
Eligibility: B. Sc. (Food Science/Food Technology /Biochemistry /Microbiology/ Agriculture); B. 
 
Tech (Food Technology/Biotechnology/Chemical Technology); B. Pharma. 
 
Selection procedure: Merit of the qualifying examination (up to 2nd Semester for 2 years programme 
or up to 4th Semester for 3 years programme and up to 6th Semester for 4-year course). 
 
Ph. D. (Food Technology) 
  
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April, 2025. 
 
Eligibility: Candidates having passed M. Tech. (Food Tech/ Biotech/ Chemical Engg/ Mechanical 
Engg/ Dairy Tech) or M.Sc. (Food Science/Technology/ Biotechnology/ Biochemistry) or M. Pharma 
(Pharmaceutics/ Pharmacognosy/ Phytochemistry/ Pharma Biotech) with minimum of 55% marks or 
equivalent grade from a recognized University/ Institute. 
 
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admission in the Ph.D. 
 
programs. 
 
 
CENTRE FOR VIROLOGY-SIST 
 
The Centre for Virology established at Jamia Hamdard in the year 2021 to provide international quality 
education and cutting-edge research training in the fields of Basic virology, viral diagnostics, vaccine 
biology, drug discovery and clinical virology with active collaboration with national and international 
academic, scientific and health-care institutions as well as industries to meet societal education and 
training needs. 
 
ACADEMIC STAFF 
 
 
Dr. Mairaj Ahmad Ansari, Assistant Professor (Coordinator) 
 
Dr. Mirza Sarwar Baig, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Sana Tanweer, Assistant Professor  
 
 
 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
M.Sc. (Medical Virology) 
 
 
Seats: 30 
 
Duration: 2 years 
 
Eligibility: 
Bachelor's 
Degree 
in 
Biomedical 
Sciences/Life 
Sciences/Zoology/ 
Microbiology/Chemistry/Biochemistry/Environmental/Biology/Biotechnology/Botany/Toxicology/ 
Clinical Sciences/ Laboratory Techniques/ B. Pharm with at least 50% marks in the aggregate from 
Jamia Hamdard or any other examination recognized by the University or equivalent thereto. 
Candidates could be national/ international/ NRI. 
 
Selection Procedure: On the basis of merit of the qualifying examination 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (COE) IN UNANI MEDICINE 
(PHARMACOGNOSY & PHARMACOLOGY) - SIST 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director: Prof. Sayeed Ahmad 
 
The AYUSH system has an exceptional potential to become an important alternative resource for 
improving global public health and the Unani system of Medicine is an incredible part of AYUSH 
system. However, to achieve the goal, there is a need for exhaustive scientific research on Unani 
Medicine and to carry out training for competency development of AYUSH Professionals. The CoE 
carries forward the vision of founder Chancellor Janab Hakeem Abdul Hameed Sahib for developing 
state of the art research in the field of traditional medicine especially Unani utilizing modern concepts 
of Drug Development from pharmaceutical approaches. The CoE is a well-equipped lab created from 
AYUSH support under Ayurswasthya Yojana for promoting research on Unani and other Traditional 
drugs and formulations as well as medicinal plants for their quality control, metabolomic profiling, 
pharmacokinetics, stability, toxicity and biological screenings required for drug development at par 
with the global standards. The objective of the CoE is to carry forward this challenging task by 
conceptualizing and executing contemporary and scientific research and training AYUSH professionals  
 
 
in the modern scientific techniques. 
  
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
Ph.D. in Traditional Indian Medicine (Unani/Ayurveda) 
 
 
The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme from session 2025-26 will be released in the month 
of April 2025. 
 
Seats: 04 (Two sponsored by Hamdard Laboratories, India Ltd, Food Division) 
 
Eligibility: Masters' degree with minimum of 55% marks in aggregate in subjects such as Health, 
Medicine, Pharmacy and Allied Sciences fromarecognized University/Institute. 
 
NET-JRF/ Individual Fellowship holders/ Project Fellows, MD (Unani / Ayurveda) will be preferred 
for admission in the Ph.D. programs. 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Facilities at CoE Unani Medicine: 
 
The Centre of Excellence in Unani Medicine CoE (Pharmacognosy and Pharmacology) is a state-of-
the-art research facility as a part of School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Jamia Hamdard, 
New Delhi, India. CoE is funded by the Ministry of AYUSH, Government of India, and is dedicated 
for conducting a wide range of scientific investigations related to Traditional Unani Medicine. This 
initiative empowers to carry out advanced research on Unani Medicine right and offers a range of 
facilities, including: GC-MS with ECD and Head Space Online Library, SCFE (Supercritical Fluid 
Extractor), Flash Chromatography, HPTLC (High-Performance Thin-Layer Chromatography), ICP-MS 
(Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry), LCMS, HPLC, DNA barcoding. Microscopic 
studies, Stability Chamber, Zebrafish Model, Fume Hoods, Cell Culture BSL-3 (Biosafety Level 3) 
Laboratory, Biosafety Cabinets, Laminar Flow Hood, extractors and evaporators/ dryers including 
lyophilizer, rotaevaporators, nitrovac etc with inhouse auditorium/ training facility, software tools such 
as Biorender, Mass Fragmenter, XL-Stat, GraphPad Prism, software’s for in silico studies. The Centre 
also maintains valuable research collaborations with renowned industries, including Hamdard, Dabur, 
Aimil, Universal Biotech Ltd., Transformative Learning Solutions Pvt Ltd, and DolcasBotanosys Pvt 
Ltd USA, Tulip Lab, Avitech Nutrition, Ayu Swastha etc among others. Additionally, we have 
established collaborative partnerships with educational institutions both within India and abroad, 
including NCNPR at the University of Mississippi (USA) and the University of Khartoum (Sudan), as 
well as institutions in Russia, the Philippines, and many more. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Centre for Environment and Sustainable Development 
(CESD) 
Director: Prof. M. Z. Abdin 
Deputy Director: Dr. M. Iqbal R. Khan 
 
Vision 
In the current scenario of climate change and burgeoning global population, food and nutritional 
security entails the utilization of expertise and technologies from various disciplines of basic sciences 
for the sustainability of environment and agriculture. The vision of CESD aims toward generating 
worldwide food, nutritional and bio-resources by developing ambitious environmentalists, 
biotechnologists and agriculturists and to reap the benefits of their potential to seize, contribute and 
propagate the central dogma of sustainable development goals (SDGs) on the National and International 
platforms. The ethics and values oscillating around the clock will facilitate the perpetuations for climate 
action, empowerment and sustainability to strive firmly for achieving the SDGs faster. 
 
 
Mission 
1. To advance the understanding of the environment and sustainability through the development of 
multi-disciplinary education, research and outreach programs. 
2. To educate and train the future generations to resolve environmental issues at the intersection of 
different disciplines of natural sciences through innovative and transformative research. 
3. To increase the efficacy of teaching and research to achieve improved agricultural productivity and 
income of the Nation under adverse environmental conditions. 
4. To strengthen the capacity of national research programmes to conduct problem-solving research and 
promote adoption of improved technologies promoting global dominance. 
 
 
5. To introduce innovations, desirable policy interventions, reorientation of research and extension 
systems leading to agricultural growth and development worldwide. 
6. To spread awareness about the consequences of anthropogenic activities on climate systems and the 
environment among the communities.  
7. To integrate, synthesize and apply the environment-sound perception for socio-economic concerns by 
enhancing food and nutritional security. 
 
Academic Staff:  
Dr. M. Afshar Alam, Professor  
Dr. M. Z. Abdin, Professor & Director  
Dr. Mahmaduzzafar, Professor  
Dr. M. Iqbal R. Khan, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Monica Saifi, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Javed Ahmad, Assistant Professor 
Dr. Parvez Hayat, IPS (Retd), Professor of Practice 
 
RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE 
The Centre has well equipped laboratories for research. The available equipment include growth 
chambers, BOD incubators, refrigerated microfuges, beam spectrophotometer, PCR, high speed 
cold centrifuge, deep freezer (-20ºC), IRGA (Photosynthesis System), flame photometer, gel 
documentation system. A modest green house and net house is also available. Weighing balance, 
Ice flaking machine, Autoclaves, Millipore water system, Centrifuge, PCR, spectrophotometer, 
Freeze dryer, Ultradeep freezer (-80°C} Real time PCR, Rota evaporator, GC-MS, Fluorescence 
Microscope, UV chamber, Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope, Shaking incubator and Ultra-
centrifuge. 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
Postgraduate Courses 
 
M.Sc.  (Environmental Science) 
Seats: 20 
Duration: Two years (Four Semesters) 
● 
Eligibility: Candidates must have a bachelor’s degree in any branch of Basic or Applied 
Sciences under 10+2+3 education pattern from school/ institute/ university as recognised at the 
state or national level. 
● Candidates must have secured at least 55 percent marks in aggregate of subjects of qualifying 
degree examination. 
 
Selection Procedure: Selection to the PG programme will be based on the merit in the 
qualifying examination. Basis of merit will be determined by marks in the respective qualifying 
examination (upto 4th semester for a 3-year programme or upto 6th semester for a 4-year 
programme). 
 
 
 
 
 
Doctoral Program 
 
** The notification for admission in Ph.D. programme for session 2025-26 will be released 
separately in the month of April, 2025. 
 
Ph.D. (Environmental Science) 
Eligibility: Master’s Degree or a professional degree declared equivalent to Master’s degree by 
the corresponding statutory body, with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade 
‘B’ in the UGC 7-point scale.  
NET-JRF/GATE/SLET/GAT-B qualified candidates and Project Fellows will be preferred for 
admissions in Ph.D. programs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SCHOOL OF SKILLS AND VOCATIONAL STUDIES 
 
INSTITUTE OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
 
“Empowering Young Minds with Future Skills” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director: Prof. (Dr.) N. Ravichandran 
 
The Institute of Skills Development (ISD), under School of Skills and Vocational Studies (SSVS), 
Jamia Hamdard established in 2022, recognizes the significance of ensuring that educational 
programmes are in line with the ever-changing requirements of the business sector. Through our 
collaboration with NSDC and Sector Skill Councils, we have created a series of Short-term 
Certificate courses (3-12 months) and B.Voc (Hons. With Research) Apprenticeship Embedded 
Degree Programs (3/4 Years) that are precisely intended to bridge the gap between academics and 
industry, equipping students to prosper in today's competitive job market. These Short-term 
Certificate courses (3-12 months) and B.Voc ( Hons. With Research) Apprenticeship Embedded 
Degree Programs (3/4 Years) are designed to provide individuals with industry-relevant skills and 
certifications. 
INSTITUTE OF SKILLS DEVELOPMENT 
 
Whether it's in Healthcare, IT, Hospitality, Retail, or Another Industry, our short-term and Degree 
courses span a wide range of subjects, appealing to students' different interests and goals. ISD aims 
to provide a comprehensive learning experience that equips students to excel in their chosen disciplines 
by combining classroom education, practical training, and industrial internships. 
 
MISSION 
• To create environments where faculty, staff, and students can discover, critically examine, preserve, and 
transmit knowledge, wisdom, and values that will help ensure the skill requirements and value-added 
skills of current and future generations while improving the quality of life. 
• To enable all interested pupils an equal opportunity to access solid skills orientation at both the 
undergraduate and post-graduate levels. 
• The SSVS and ISD would be a trendsetter in how it stewards resources for the benefit of everybody in 
its geographic vicinity. 
 
VISION 
• Be a global leader, an exemplar for integrating skills and value-added talents into teaching, research, 
operations, and public service. 
 
OBJECTIVES 
• To provide the skilled workforce required in the country, area, and internationally by offering 
occupational, technical, and professional courses and programs that prepare students for immediate 
employment and promotion. 
• To offer credit and non-credit courses and, activities for personal enrichment, vocational upgrading, and 
career mobility. 
• To contribute to and stimulate the community's cultural and intellectual life by providing a forum for 
the exchange of ideas; providing leadership, knowledge, problem-solving skills, and general 
informational services; and providing opportunities for community members to develop their creativity 
and appreciate the creativity of others. 
 
APPROACHES AND TECHNIQUES 
This SSVS and ISD would be transformed into a dynamic hub that will provide all employment-related 
options for students. Under the auspices of this centre, regular exchanges between academia and 
industry will be held to foster innovative thinking, incubate ideas, change mindsets, and boost the 
employability of students. Students' soft skills, such as communication, teamwork, leadership, and 
domain knowledge, will be given special attention. Aside from routinely arranging training and 
placement drives, partnerships will be formed with both public and private partners to provide 
vocational, skill, and entrepreneurial training to students to help them start their own Micro, Small, and 
Medium Enterprises. 
 
 
VALUE-ADDED BENEFITS 
• Addressing the skill development needs of the existing University’s students through Choice Based 
Curriculum System /Electives and credit-transfer system 
 
• Providing executive assistance and coordination across the University and its associated campuses for 
the development, implementation, assessment, and improvement of vocational programs and services 
that promote skill development. 
• Assuring that SSVS/ISD and the University fulfil or surpass all state-wide objectives, targets, and goals 
related to skill development, as well as coordinating with state-wide skilling initiatives; 
 
The ISD and SSVS is committed to diversity within and across the community which is fulfilled 
by: 
• Providing positive system-wide executive support in the development, implementation, and 
improvement of skills verticals, vocational programs and entrepreneurship development; 
• Encouraging the increased representation of vulnerable and economically weaker sections of the 
population to obtain necessary skills and/or value-added skills for income generation or better 
livelihoods; 
• Supporting full participation of those who cannot afford to learn the skills to sustain their livelihoods; 
• Creating policies for operations, education, research, and service, planning and administration, 
engagement, and cultural and community links at the system level. 
 
INFRASTRUCTURE 
The Institute of Skills Development (ISD) and School of Skills and Vocational Studies are developing 
infrastructure to promote practical learning and student development. It includes academic facilities like 
classrooms, laboratories, workshops, and computer labs, as well as training facilities like simulation 
centres and industry skills labs. The campus includes industry-linked facilities like placement cells and 
co-working spaces. The facilities are tailored to the University's focus areas and backed by industry 
partnerships and government schemes. 
 
HOW SKILLS ARE ENHANCED? 
 
Hands On Project:  Students' understanding and ability in a topic of study are tested through this 
project, which also allows them to expand their knowledge through research. It includes original 
research, real-world problem solving, or a practical project. Further, the project is a specific and finite 
activity that produces a measurable and observable result while adhering to predetermined criteria. 
On-Job-Training: On-Job-Training is a mandatory part of ISD programs, preparing students for 
industry-oriented training in their chosen industry. Successful completion ensures adherence to rules 
and regulations. 
Internship: An internship (usually lasting 3-6 weeks) allows students to obtain a broad 
understanding of a specific business/skill with Industry relevant skills alongside academic knowledge. 
Internships allow students to obtain a better grasp of a profession while also learning business skills and 
relevant industry skills.  
Apprenticeship: Apprenticeship is a long-term training program (24-28 weeks) that allows a person 
to apply learned trade skills while fine-tuning and developing the abilities required to do specialized 
tasks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE PARTNERS 
 
Our knowledge partners - Media and Entertainment Skills Council (MESC); Tourism and Hospitality 
Skill Council (THSC); Healthcare Sector Skill Council (HSSC); Apparel Made-up Home Furnishing 
Sector Skill Council (AMH SSC); The Electronics Sector Skills Council of India (ESSCI); Food 
Industry Capacity & Skill Initiative (FICSI); National Skills Development Corporation  (NSDC); 
Management & Entrepreneurship and Professional Skills Council (MEPSC); Automotive Skills 
Development Council (ASDC);  and  Banking, Financial Services and Insurance ( BFSI) Sector Skill 
Council, who extend their support in providing internships and trainings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SHORT-TERM CERTIFICATE COURSES WITH ON-JOB-
TRAINING  
 
COURSES 
DURATION 
ELIGIBILITY 
FEE 
SEAT 
Genetic Counsellor 
 
6 Months with OJT 
Science Graduate 
20,000 INR 
30 
Pre-school & Daycare 
Facilitator 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Cyber Security 
 
9 Months with OJT 
Graduate 
20,000 INR 
30 
Script Writer 
 
6 Months with OJT 
Graduate 
20,000 INR 
30 
Data Science/Analytics 
 
12 Months with OJT 
Graduate 
20,000 INR 
30 
Animation/VFX Editor 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Social Media Executive 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Digital Marketing 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Electric Vehicle (EV) Service 
Technician 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Drone Service Technician 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Drone Manufacturing 
Technician 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass 
20,000 INR 
30 
Equity Trading 
 
6 Months with OJT 
12th Pass/Graduation 
20,000 INR 
30 
 
B.VOC (Hons. With Research) 
APPRENTICESHIP EMBEDDED DEGREE PROGRAMS 
 
COURSES 
DURATION 
ELIGIBILITY 
FEE 
SEAT 
B. Voc (Retail 
Management/Marketing with 
Specialization in Automotive 
Sector) 
3/4 Years 
10+2 or equivalent in 
any stream 
80,000 Per Year + 
Administrative Fees Per 
Annum 
25 
B. Voc/BFS (Financial 
Analytics/BFSI) 
3/4 Years 
10+2 or equivalent in 
Commerce/any stream 
80,000 Per Year + 
Administrative Fees Per 
Annum 
25 
 
B. Voc in (Automotive 
Manufacturing Technology) 
3/4 Years 
10+2 or equivalent in 
any stream 
80,000 Per Year + 
Administrative Fees Per 
Annum 
25 
 
B. Voc/B.sc (Patient Care 
Management with 
specialization in Palliative 
and Geriatric Care) 
3/4 Years 
10+2 or equivalent in 
any stream 
 
80,000 Per Year + 
Administrative Fees Per 
Annum 
25 
 
 
B.VOC (Hons. With Research-AEDP) 
 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
❖ B. Voc (Retail Management/Marketing with Specialization in Automotive Sector) 
Seat: 25 Per Batch 
Duration: 3/4 years 
Eligibility for Admission: The eligibility for admission to Bachelor in Retail Management/Marketing 
shall be 10+2 or equivalent in any stream. 
Selection procedure: Selection will be on the basis of merit of marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination(s) 
Fee: 80,000 Per Year +Administrative Fees Per Annum 
 
❖ B. Voc/BFS (Financial Analytics/Banking Financial Services and Insurance) 
Seats: 25 Per Batch 
Duration: 3/4 Years  
Eligibility for Admission: The eligibility for admission to Bachelor in Financial Analytics/BFSI shall 
be 10+2 or equivalent in commerce/any stream.  
Selection procedure: Selection will be on the basis of merit of marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination(s) 
Fee: 80,000 Per Year +Administrative Fees Per Annum 
 
❖ B. Voc (Automotive Manufacturing Technology) 
Seat: 25 Per Batch 
Duration: 3/4 Years 
Eligibility for Admission: The eligibility for admission to Bachelor in Automotive Manufacturing 
Technology shall be 10+2 or equivalent in any stream. 
Selection procedure: Selection will be on the basis of merit of marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination(s) 
Fee: 80,000 Per Year +Administrative Fees Per Annum 
 
 
❖ B. Voc/B.sc (Patient Care Management with Specialization in Palliative and 
Geriatric Care) 
Seat: 25 Per Batch 
Duration: 3/4 years 
Eligibility for Admission: The eligibility for admission to B. Voc/B.sc in Patient Care Management 
shall be 10+2 or equivalent in any stream. 
Selection procedure: Selection will be on the basis of merit of marks obtained in the qualifying 
examination(s) 
Fee: 80,000 Per Year +Administrative Fees Per Annum 
 
 
 
 
 
Short-Term Certificate Courses With OJT 
Programs of Study, Eligibility and Selection process 
 
❖ Pre-school & Daycare Facilitator 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility: 12th Pass/Graduation 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Electrical Vehicle (EV) Service Technician  
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  12th pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Data Science/Analytics 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 12 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  Graduation 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Cyber Security 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 9 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  Graduate 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Genetic Counsellor 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility: Science Graduate 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Animation/VFX Editor 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  12th Pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Social Media Executive 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility: 12th Pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
 
❖ Digital Marketing 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  12th Pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Drone Service Technician 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  12th Pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Drone Manufacturing Technician 
Seat: 30 Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  12th Pass 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
❖ Script Writer 
Seat: 30 Students Per Batch 
Duration: 6 Months with OJT 
Eligibility:  Graduate 
Fee: 20,000 INR Per Course 
 
ACADEMIC AND ADMINISTRATIVE STAFF 
 
Dr. N Ravichandran, Ph.D.  Professor & Director 
Dr. Jwaad Akhtar Khan, Ph.D. Assistant Professor & Assistant Director  
Dr. Neelofar, Ph.D. Assistant Professor 
Dr. Behjat Moini, Ph.D. Assistant Professor  
Ms. Farheen Hasan, B.A. Assistant 
Mr. Amanuz Zama, PGDM. Project Co-ordinator 
Mr. Sameer Alam, M.Sc. MIS Executive  
 
CONTACT US 
Nano Tech Building, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi-110062 
Phone No: +91 7652053247, 7355603787 
                            Website: www.jamiahamdard.ac.in/instituteofskillsdevelopment/ 
Email: isd@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
 
SOCIAL MEDIA HANDLES 
Facebook: www.facebook.com/profile.php?id=61570772536913&mibextid=ZbWKwL 
Instagram: www.instagram.com/isd_jamiahamdarddelhi?igsh=djl2YWdnZ2xqMmN3 
LinkedIn: www.linkedin.com/in/institute-of-skills-development-jamia-hamdard-34007731b
+91 7652053247/7355603787 
(Ms. Farheen Hasan/ Mr. Sameer Alam) 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies 
(CMMS) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Director: Prof. (Dr.) Reshma Nasreen 
Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies (CMMS) is committed to delivering premier 
education and training, with a focus on empowering students to acquire essential skills, transforming them 
into knowledgeable scholars and proficient professionals dedicated to societal service. CMMS offers B.A. 
(Honours with Research) Journalism and Mass Communication, M.A. (Journalism and Mass 
Communication) as well as Ph.D. (Journalism and Mass Communication) programme. 
In the era of the information and communication technology revolution, the influence and significance of 
Mass Media and Communication have considerably expanded. The programmes at CMMS are 
meticulously designed to equip aspiring media professionals with the necessary industry and technical 
expertise crucial for success in today's highly competitive media landscape. Our programmes aim to 
develop strategic thinkers proficient in both practical and theoretical aspects of the field. Graduates gain 
critical thinking abilities, effective communication skills, and a versatile skill set, preparing them for 
success in various areas of media and communication 
 
Course Curriculum  
All the progammes have been designed to train aspiring media candidates in various industries and 
technical skills in audio-video editing, anchoring, content writing, photography, media reporting etc. 
These professionals would be employed with TV news channels, Radio Broadcasting, Print Media, Digital 
Journalism, and in the Government Communication set-up. This course also enhances entrepreneurial 
skills and training to set up their production units. The Center is actively dedicated to research and 
development in the field of mass communication and journalism. 
Career Opportunities  
● Journalist/Media Reporter: researching, writing, copy editing and reporting news stories for 
print, online, or broadcast media. 
● Public Relations Specialist: managing relationships with the media and other stakeholders.  
 
● Social Media Manager: creating and implementing social media campaigns.  
● Media Planner: developing strategies for advertising campaigns.  
● Advertising Executive: creating and managing advertising campaigns.  
● TV Anchor/Radio Jockey: hosting programs on television or radio, providing information, 
entertainment or news. 
● Documentary Filmmaker: producing non-fiction films for television or online distribution. 
● Copy/Content writer: creating written content for advertising and marketing materials such as 
brochures, billboards, and for websites, social media, and other digital platforms. 
● Video Editor: editing, enhancing, and arranging video footage to create the final film. 
● Photojournalist/ Photographer: capturing images for telling a story, reporting news, or for 
artistic expression or commercial use. 
● Government/Corporate Communication Roles: Creating and sharing information with the 
public/organization, managing media relations 
● Academic Careers: Roles like Professor, Researcher and Academic Administrator in educational 
institutions.  
 
Academic Staff 
 
1. Prof. (Dr.) Reshma Nasreen, Director  
2. Prof. (Dr.) F.B. Khan, Professor  
3. Ms. Priti Mohan, Professor of Practice 
4. Mr. Nalin Verma, Professor of Practice 
5. Dr. M. Zishan, Assistant Professor  
6. Dr. Abdul Quadir Siddiquee, Assistant Professor 
7. Dr. Purnima K. Oraon, Assistant Professor 
8. Dr. Nisa Askari, Assistant Professor 
9. Dr. Saad Ullah Khan, Assistant Professor  
10. Ms. Neeti Dauneria, Visiting Faculty  
Programmes of Study, Eligibility, and Selection Process 
 
Undergraduate Programme 
B.A. (Honours with Research) Journalism and Mass Communication & 
 
Seats: 50 
Duration: 04 Years/ 08 Semesters 
Eligibility: Passed 10+2 examination or equivalent in any discipline from a recognized board/ institution 
with at least 50% marks.  
Selection Process: The admission to this programme will be on the basis of merit of the first five subjects 
in the qualifying examination. 
 
B.A. (Honours with Research) Film Making 
 
Seats: 50 
Duration: 04 Years/ 08 Semesters 
Eligibility: Passed 10+2 examination or equivalent in any discipline from a recognized board/ institution 
with at least 50% marks.  
Selection Process: The admission to this programme will be on the basis of merit of the first five subjects 
in the qualifying examination. 
 
 
 
Postgraduate Programme 
M.A. (Journalism and Mass Communication) 
Seats: 20 
Duration: 02 Years/ 04 Semesters 
Eligibility: Graduate from any discipline from a recognized board/ institution/university with at least 50% 
marks.  
Selection Process:  
The admission may be done based on the merit of the (10+2+3) examinations followed by an individual 
interview and portfolio submission. 
 
Doctoral Programme 
Ph.D. (Journalism and Mass Communication) 
Eligibility and selection procedure: Candidates shall have a Master's Degree in concerned and allied 
subject with at least 55% marks in aggregate or its equivalent Grade 'B' in the UGC 7-point scale. NET-
JRF/Individual Fellowship holders/Project Fellows will be preferred for admissions in Ph.D. programmes. 
 
  
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
Facilities at Jamia Hamdard 
 
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT CELL  
RDC-JAMIA HAMDARD 
 
Director: Prof. Shakir Ali 
 
Preamble: Research and innovation make a crucial aspect of education in Higher Education Institutions (HEIs). 
Societal challenges can only be addressed by having a strong and vibrant higher education ecosystem with a 
strong emphasis on quality of research, innovation, and technology development. Jamia Hamdard, as envisaged 
by the National Education Policy (NEP)-2020 and the guidelines of UGC published in 2022, created a Research 
& Development Cell (RDC) to promote a culture of quality research and innovation at its premise vide an Office 
Order no. AS/JH/UGC-05/2022, dated 14/6/2022. The cell is headed by a Director, RDC and is guided by a 
Research Advisory Council/Committee (RAC) chaired by the Vice Chancellor.  
 
Vision: To put in place a robust mechanism for developing and strengthening a research ecosystem at Jamia 
Hamdard. 
 
Mission: (1) Create an environment conducive for quality research and productivity, (2) Consolidate, encourage, 
and facilitate research at Jamia Hamdard for better output and societal benefits, (3) Facilitate collaborations at 
local, national, and international levels and create research groups, (4) Mobilization of resources and access to 
funding by encouraging collaborative research. 
 
Governance structure: RDC at Jamia Hamdard is governed by an apex body, the Research Advisory Council 
(RAC) headed by the Vice Chancellor of the University. The working of the cell (RDC) is facilitated by multiple 
committees, approved by the RAC, and headed and convened by the Director (RDC), a distinguished researcher 
from the university nominated by the Vice Chancellor. UGC directives (2022) envisage the RDC to have 
following five verticals/committees: 
 
1) Committee for Research Program and Policy Development 
2) Committee on Collaboration and Community 
3) Product Development, Monitoring and Commercialization Committee 
4) Committee of IPR, Legal and Ethical Matters, and  
5) Finance and Infrastructure Committee 
 
Functions: RDC-Jamia Hamdard is an enabling unit at Jamia Hamdard for attaining targets of a self-
reliant/Atma-Nirbhar Bharat. The Cell is pivotal in catalysing multidisciplinary and transdisciplinary research to 
go beyond disciplinary boundaries, and actively engage stakeholders from different sectors. 
 
 Briefly, key functions of RDC, as envisaged in the UGC guidelines, 2022 include: 
 
(1) Creation of an organizational structure with role-based functions, formulate Research Policy for the 
University, identify thrust areas of research, and form related cluster groups, frontline teams, and 
consortia of researchers to bring researchers, faculty, students, scholars, and post-doctoral fellows for 
joint high value interdisciplinary and trans-disciplinary research projects to avail national and 
international funding opportunities. RDC-Jamia Hamdard is working to achieve the goal by promoting a 
culture of shared infrastructure and expertise, cross-fertilization of ideas, and resource mobilization. 
 
(2) Creation of enabling provisions in Research Policies for recruitment of research personnel, procurement 
of equipment and financial management with adequate autonomy to the Principal Investigator(s) and 
disseminate research outcomes to stakeholders and the public at large is another key function of the RDC 
envisaged by the UGC. As on today, research grants worth tens of crores of rupees including eighteen 
individual, six institutional, and four consultancy grants from both national and international funding  
 
 
sources are being managed by the investigators at Jamia Hamdard. 687 Research scholars are currently 
working on their PhD thesis in various laboratories and a significant number of project staff and 
independent post-doctoral fellows are working in various laboratories of the University.  
 
(1) Liaisoning between researchers and relevant research funding agencies, extend guidance in preparation 
and submission of research project proposals and post-sanctioning of the grants to oversee adherence to 
timelines, and act as a facilitator for networking and collaborative research. RDC-Jamia Hamdard has 
facilitated signing 25 National and 05 International agreements/MoU with a number of reputed institutes 
to facilitate research and academic activities by fostering collaboration. The University has a robust 
mechanism in place for guidance and support of researchers at Jamia Hamdard. 
 
(2) Coordination with University-Industry Inter Linkages, Incubation, Innovation & Entrepreneurship 
Development, and Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). University has started an incubation and 
innovation centre and taken initiatives for industry-academia linkages, including an agreement with 
multinational companies like BD Biosciences, a leading manufacturer of flow cytometers, an advance 
technology used in research. A separate cell for IPR has been created and is functional. 
 
(3) Development of a robust Institutional Research Information System for sharing the status of ongoing and 
completed research projects and programmes, expertise & resources, etc., and making effective use of 
the Information & Communication Technology (ICT) for preparing database of in-house experts to 
provide industrial consultancy and services is another key function of RDC which the University is 
working and try to improve.  
 
(4) Engage and utilize the services of superannuated active faculty/scientists in research, capacity building 
of talented young minds, and promote mobility of researchers across institutions and R&D Labs. 
Eminent scientists, professors, and persons of high stature in their respective field are appointed as 
Adjunct Professor and Professor of Practice in the University as per the UGC guidelines and on the 
recommendation of the Competent Body of the University. 
 
(5) Serve as a nodal centre for ideation and conceptualization of research topics and themes by organizing 
workshops and training programs, and ensure integrity and ethical practices in research activities 
including clearance of bioethical committee wherever required. RDC-Jamia Hamdard has been routinely 
conducting and facilitating workshops, training programs and other activities as per the mandate. 
 
(6) Facilitate resource mobilization and create a Corpus for research and development from government, 
industry, and other funding agencies and channelize Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) funds for 
sustenance and furtherance of research activities. Apart from creating a Corpus fund exclusively for 
R&D, RDC, as envisaged by the UGC, is also expected to explore venture capitalists and angel investors 
for funding in research and innovation, liaise with funding agencies, and track funding opportunities 
from industrial consortia. The corpus created for research could also be used to support the seed funding 
for freshly recruited faculty for developing research facilities, publications, and patenting. RDC-Jamia 
Hamdard is working on this aspect and will take necessary steps as per the policy of the University. 
 
(7) As per the directives of UGC, RDC-Jamia Hamdard has also developed mechanisms to ensure integrity 
and ethics in research and comply with ethical codes of research and publishing practices at institutional, 
national, and global levels and sensitize the research community about dubious research and publishing 
practices and predatory journals. Academic Integrity Panels have been constituted at School level and 
RDC. The University has subscribed and mandated the use of DrillBit, a standard plagiarism check 
software and made it accessible to researchers at Jamia Hamdard.  
 
 
* 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
CENTER FOR TRAINING & DEVELOPMENT (CTD) 
 
Centre for Training and development is an initiative of Jamia Hamdard, set up under the School of 
Management and Business Studies in the year 2022.  
 
AIM: The centre aims to provide education, skill development through practical and relevant training 
programmes to help participants build their careers, develop corporate skill sets and keep up with the 
fast-changing world.  
       
OBJECTIVE: To ensure the participants are better „fit‟ in the industry by making them industry and 
society ready. The Centre enables a leader or a leaner to know about the technicalities and 
methodologies in the best possible way. Our curriculum is completely based on the modern-day 
requirement of corporate and training industry along with the academic excellence. CTD will provide 
technical courses, intense practical lessons and a wide range of business courses. The centre focuses in 
the areas of Research, Education, Behavioural Sense, Personality Development, Skill development to 
name a few domain specific in Sales & Marketing, International Business, HR Operations, Finance, 
Strategy, Leadership etc. The Centre will be conducting and organizing training programmes, 
workshops, seminars & webinars at Local, National, and International levels. Trainees will be provided 
with necessary resources, mentorship and skill building activities for developing their professional 
career potential. The trained lecturers will help the beginners kick start their career and succeed in 
future endeavours and also enhance the skill of the working professionals of different organisations 
addressing specific executive learning/corporate training. At CTD the participants can upgrade social 
and professional skills that will develop the ability to make a significant meaningful impact on the 
community and society. CTD intends to drive innovation, access specialized expertise, advance 
research through collaborations. 
 
A Centre is built around understanding human training needs and to offer solutions in the areas of 
management. The Centre for Training and Development is driven under the aegis of Jamia Hamdard. 
Jamia Hamdard ecosystem is fostered by Hamdard National Foundation an NGO for social welfare 
with the objective of crafting an awakening regarding education and healthcare among the people 
belonging to the weaker sections of the society. University conducts cutting-edge research in the fields 
of social, natural science and technology, particularly in modern and traditional medicine systems, 
especially Unani, encompassing a holistic and integrative approach to healthcare.  
 
University also has the extensive experience in the industry and academia to meet one of the main 
academic goals to actively enhance the professional growth of practicing managers through well 
designed and well-delivered Management Development Programs (MDPs). These are short duration 
skill development programmes for corporate executives who cannot attend long duration programmes 
due to compelling professional needs but need frequent updating of their managerial competencies to 
succeed in a globalized society. These MDPs are designed for corporate workforce, social workers and 
government employees. The Centre for Training & Development, Jamia Hamdard organizes exclusive 
custom-designed programmes, to address specific Executive Learning and/or Corporate Training needs  
 
of individual organisations. Such programmes can be domain-specific as in Sales & Marketing, 
International Business, HR, Operations, Finance, Strategy, Leadership, etc. or inter-disciplinary, 
comprising an ideal combination of multiple functional areas. 
 
OUR COURSES 
 
Faculty members construct and offer open programmes based on their areas of expertise for executives 
of any organisation. Sponsored (In-company) programmes are tailored to an organization's needs. 
Thrust areas are team building, sustainability, leadership development, strategic management, 
emotional intelligence, mindfulness, IPR, analytical Techniques, HPLC, electron microscopy, animal 
handling and such others. 
 
1) One Week Online Short-Term Course (STC) on Data Analytics 
2) One Week Short Term Course (STC) on Export Import Procedures & Documents 
3) Management Development Program (MDP) for New Managers 
4) Management Development Program (MDP) on Building Positive Traits 
 
DURATION OF THE PROGRAMME 
 
Duration of the programme shall vary from three days to 6 month depending on the requirements of the 
company. 
 
To look after the affairs of CTD following members are constituted:  
 
CTD Committee Members:  
 
Prof. Reshma Nasreen – Chairperson 
Prof. Syeedun Nisa – Honorary Director 
Prof. Khwaja M. Shahid – Ajunct Professor 
Dr. Sadaf Siraj – Member 
Dr. Manpreet Kaur Bhatia – Member 
Dr. Shikha Gera – Member 
Dr. Zeeshan Ali Haq – Member 
Dr. Sherin Zafar – Member 
Ms. Tomino Cherian, Asst. Professor, CTD 
 
 
 
COLLABORATIONS OF CTD TILL DATE:  
 
1) African – Asian Rural Development Organisation, New Delhi  
2) Islamiah Women‟s Arts & Science College, Vaniyambadi, Tamil Nadu  
3) The Garage Productions Private Limited, New Delhi  
4) Management & Leadership Development Centre 
5) Academy 
of 
Organisation 
Development
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
CENTRE FOR TEACHING SUPPORT AND 
INNOVATIONS (CTSI) 
 
Director: Prof. Mymoona Akhter 
The Centre for Teaching Support and Innovation (CTSI) was established under the leadership of Prof. 
(Dr.) Mohd. Afshar Alam with the objective of providing strategic academic leadership in teaching, 
learning, and curriculum innovation. It plays a pivotal role in supporting, recommending, and 
implementing technology-enhanced teaching methodologies and holistic assessment frameworks. By 
integrating best practices in teaching-learning, CTSI serves as a catalyst for transformative change 
within the university, fostering a dynamic and future-ready academic environment. 
Dedicated to enhancing the teaching-learning process, CTSI promotes pedagogical innovation, 
research, and faculty development, aligning with the principles of inclusive and equitable education. It 
ensures students have access to high-quality, interdisciplinary learning experiences that prepare them 
for an evolving job market. By bridging gaps in the academic framework, CTSI facilitates multiple 
entry and exit points, registration on the Academic Bank of Credits (ABC) via the NAD portal, and the 
integration of MOOCs, SWAYAM, and other digital platforms. Beyond curriculum development, 
CTSI emphasizes student engagement, faculty training, and innovation-driven initiatives, organizing 
Innovation Conclaves, Smart India Hackathons, and workshops on assessment techniques and strategic 
teaching methodologies. Through these efforts, CTSI continues to drive academic excellence, foster 
lifelong learning, and shape a forward-thinking educational ecosystem at Jamia Hamdard. 
Vision and mission 
● To promote a university-wide culture of pedagogic reflection, innovation, research and  
professional development in learning and teaching. 
● Provide strategic academic leadership in learning, teaching, and curriculum development. 
● Enhance the teaching-learning process by promoting independent, critical, creative, and innovative 
thinking among students and educators. 
 
CENTRE TEAM/COMPOSITION 
● Director CTSI: Prof. Mymoona Akhter                                                                                                               
● Dy. Director CTSI: Dr. Hinna Hamid  
● Dr. Sherin Zafar, Assistant Director (Innovation Initiatives and Student Partnership) – Leads 
the development of advanced programs and courses in emerging, multidisciplinary fields. This 
role focuses on promoting entrepreneurship, fostering collaborations, and providing a platform 
for young researchers and scholars to innovate and address scientific challenges with significant 
societal impact. 
● Dr. Mohd Abdul Ahad, Assistant Director (Learning Technology Initiatives) – Oversees teacher 
development, digital innovation, training, and broader school improvement initiatives.  
● Dr. Shazia Jilani, Assistant Director (Curriculum Development) – Heads the strategic design 
and development of academic programs at Jamia Hamdard, ensuring alignment with the 
National Education Policy (NEP).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
INDUSTRY ACADEMIA 
PARTNERSHIP CELL 
Convener: Prof. Syeedun Nisa 
 
Industry-Academia Partnership Cell 
 
The Industry-Academia Partnership Cell is developed under the leadership of Honourable Chancellor 
and Honourable Vice Chancellor of Jamia Hamdard. Each School has faculties and student 
coordinators in the IAPC team. The vision is to help students in exploring placement opportunities by 
inviting various renowned companies for campus recruitment of students. The University is keen to be 
associated with well-known companies for research work, projects, training, internship and 
recruitment. The enthusiasm grows towards showcasing budding aspirants to the industry further 
gaining faith to be mutually beneficial. The hand holding not only helps the students in getting ‘dream’ 
jobs but also assists the visiting companies in identifying the ‘right’ candidate for the organization. 
 
IAPC Vision 
 
The Industry Academia Partnership Cell is established to produce technologically competent, morally 
 
& emotionally strong and ethically sound professionals, who practice commitment to their profession 
and dedicate themselves to the service of mankind. 
 
IAPC Mission 
 
The students are to be developed technically and ethically strong. To make them self-sustainable 
professionals who may perform in every arena of personal and professional life. 
 
IAPC Committee 
 
The placement related activities, at Industry-Academia Partnership Cell, are carried out by the IAPC 
committee. The committee is composed under the leadership of Hon’ble Vice Chancellor, with core 
team of senior faculties, Industry representative, Asst. TPO, faculties and student coordinators from 
each 
school.
 
Prof. M Afshar Alam, Hon'ble Vice Chancellor 
 
Prof. M. Shahar Yar 
 
Prof. Sayeed Ahmad 
 
Mr. Sanjay Thakur, Deloitte 
 
Training and Placement Officer 
 
Prof. SyeedunNisa 
 
 
Chairman 
 
Member 
 
Member 
 
Member 
 
Honorary Director 
 
Convener
 
Faculty Coordinators from each School: 
 
SMBS: Ms. Manpreet Kaur Kohli, Dr. Jwaad A Khan
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SNSAH: Mr. Noor Mohammed, Ms. Jamal Fatima Hashmi, Ms. Anjali Kaushik, Ms. Vandana 
Solanki, Ms. Sweta M Jacob, Mr. Faraz Ahmed Mufti, Mr. Ashar Imam & Dr. Kalpana Zutshi 
SEST: Dr. Bhavya Alankar, Dr. Sheerin Zafar 
SIST: Prof. Selvapandiyan, Dr. Khalid Bashir 
HILSR: Mr. Ishan Ahmad, Dr. Burhan Majid 
SHSS: Dr. Aabroo Andrabi, Dr. Sumaiya 
SUMER: Prof. Anwar Hussain Khan, Dr. Mohd. Maaz, 
SPER: Prof. Zeenat Iqbal, Prof. M Shahar Yar 
SCLS: Prof. M. Samim, Dr. Saima Wajid 
 
Recruitment Process 
 
The process is followed as per the policies of a recruiting organisation. Companies have different 
rounds in the process starting from Pre-Placement talk, followed by a written test, Group Discussion 
(may or may not), Technical and HR interviews of eligible and shortlisted students. The drives can be 
conducted via on-campus or off- campus or through online mode. 
 
Once an organization shows interest for recruiting students from the University the students are asked 
to register for the given job profile. The job opening and its profile are shared with the related IAPC 
committee members and student coordinators. The interested students have to register and give consent 
to participate. Only the interested students are required to register as the entire process is not 
mandatory. The registered and eligible students are considered for the opening and their names and 
resumes are shared with the company. It is the responsibility of the student to keep his/her resumes 
updated. After the process is over, result is announced and shortlisted students will undergo 
background verification (as per policy) by the company. If the eligibility and background verification is 
satisfactory, the student is finally offered. 
 
 
 
Pre-Placement Talk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Campus Hiring 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The students have earned laurels for the University by receiving packages from well-known companies in the 
range of 3.5LPA – 31LPA. The organizations are repeatedly doing campus hiring with each batch and are 
satisfied by the performance of students. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
BIOINFORMATICS INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITY 
BIF CENTRE-JAMIA HAMDARD 
 
Coordinator & Chairman: Prof. Shakir Ali 
bif.centre@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
 
The Bioinformatics Centre at Jamia Hamdard is an independent Bioinformatics Infrastructure Facility 
(BIF) created by the DBT, Ministry of Science & Technology in 2008-09 under its BTISNet scheme (F. 
No. BT/BI/25/062/2012 (BIF). DBT continued supporting the centre till the BTISNet scheme ended in 
2020, and thereafter the centre is being maintained by the University. The functioning of the centre is 
looked by a committee of the following duly constituted by the University: 
1) Prof. Shakir Ali, SCLS, Coordinator, BIF 
 
Chairman 
2) Prof. Mymoona Akhtar, SPER, Dy. Coordinator  
Member 
3) Dr. Jawed Ahmad, SEST 
 
 
 
Member 
4) Dr. Sayeed ur Rehman, SCLS 
 
 
 
Member 
 
The centre has a mandate of promoting the use of bioinformatics and computational tools in research to 
facilitate drug discovery and understand the disease mechanisms. The infrastructure at the centre is used for 
research and capacity building. The facility is accessible to anyone (students, scholars, and teachers) who 
intend to learn/use the computational tools particularly in the area of in silico drug target identification, 
screening of druggable moieties, including the natural products and synthetic moieties, drug repurposing, 
ePharmacophore modelling, and network biology, where gene expression datasets have been successfully 
used for identification of key regulators in human diseases. Additionally, the identification of alternative 
splicing isoforms using computational tools is a key research focus, aiding in the discovery of novel 
disease-associated variants. The infrastructure has played a key role in dozens of publications published by 
the scholars and students of Jamia Hamdard in peer reviewed journals of international repute, and trained a 
large number of students and staff in bioinformatics and computational methods in biological and 
pharmaceutical sciences.  
 
Capacity building of young researchers in bioinformatics and computational methods is a key mandate of 
the centre. The centre organizes Workshops and hands-on training sessions where advanced tools and 
techniques in bioinformatics research are explained to the participants. The centre organized its 11th 
Workshop on 25-27 November 2024, where a large number of participants were trained on Molecular 
Simulations in Biological Research. 
 
Key areas where the centre has worked include network biology, deep learning based chemical informatics 
methods for QSAR models, virtual screening, molecular modelling, and simulations. Another area where 
the centre is working is antimicrobial resistance in human gut microbiota. Integrating existing genomics 
and pharmacogenomics to identify disease and drug action mechanisms and new uses of existing drugs, 
developing computational and statistical methods to integrate the datasets on single cell transcriptomic, 
genotype-phenotype, protein-protein interactions and pathways to systems level understanding are other 
important areas which could ultimately translate into precise identification of potential targets and where 
the centre intends to excel. 
 
The infrastructure at BIF includes Database/Application server and a medium end (Proxy & File) server 
and Workstations. SYBYL-X suite, 3D-QSAR modules—CoMFA (3D-QSAR), CoMSIA (H-bonding 
properties and scoring combinatorial libraries), Topomer CoMFA (Homology modelling and docking), 
GOLD (Virtual screening, lead optimization and correct binding mode identification of active molecules), 
and RECORE (Scaffold hopping based on small molecule crystal structure conformations) are some of the 
commonly used tools at the centre used in drug design. In future, BIF Centre plans to start a certificate 
course in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology. BIF Centre also accepts students for internship from 
other universities, for which applications are accepted throughout the year.  
 
 
 
CENTRAL ANIMAL HOUSE FACILITY (CAHF) 
(Registration number 173/GO/ReBi/S/2000/CCSEA) 
 
In/Charge: Prof. Shakir Ali 
 
CAHF is a central facility at Jamia Hamdard which houses small animal-rodents for scientific research on 
animals. The facility caters to the need of small experimental animals specifically rodents of researchers 
from various schools of Jamia Hamdard, including its Medical College, under the supervision of a qualified 
Veterinary Officer. 
 
The facility at Jamia Hamdard is a registered facility with a license to breed and use small animals-rodents 
for research purpose. CAHH is registered with the Committee for the Control and Supervision of 
Experiments on Animals (CCSEA) constituted by the Ministry of Fisheries, Animal Husbandry and 
Dairying, Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Government of India.  
 
The animal facility at JH is one of the oldest experimental animal facilities in Delhi, started in early 1970s, 
and has been registered with CCSEA from its creation in 2000. Registration is renewed every five years 
and the current cycle is valid up to 2028. CAHF at JH is spread over an area of 4,300 square feet. The 
objective of the CAHF is to promote ethical use of animals for biomedical research according to the 
existing national and international norms (3Rs: replace, reduce, and refine). CAHF has a fulltime dedicated 
veterinarian who is not only responsible for the smooth function of the facility, but also provides technical 
support and training to the investigators. The facility is inspected by the CCSEA annually. 
 
Currently CAHF houses small animal rodents - various species of mouse, rat, and hamster, and is equipped 
with a state-of-the-art infrastructure, including the IVC system and separate rooms for housing a species to 
avoid disease transmission and inter-species conflicts, and to eliminate anxiety and possible physiological 
and behavioral changes due to interspecies conflict. CAHF has 24 h power back up, and a system to 
maintain controlled environmental conditions of temperature (24-26°C), relative humidity (60 ± 10%), and 
automatic light and dark cycle with 100% fresh air exchange in all animal rooms. The electrical system is 
safe and provides appropriate lighting and enough power outlets. Animals are provided sterilized feed and 
bedding material by way of an industrial level autoclave. Air purification unit, thermometers, hygrometers, 
autoclave chamber, are well maintained. The function of the facility is maintained by a maintenance 
committee. Meetings of an Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (IAEC), duly constituted by the CCSEA, 
are regularly held to screen, and recommend protocols for (animal) ethical clearance. IAEC consists of nine 
members, including 4 CCSEA nominees, nominated by the Ministry.  
The animal house has a housing capacity of 2200 mice including Swiss albino, Balb/c and C57BL/6, 2200 
rats (Wistar strain), and 200 hamsters. 
A robust biological waste management system is in place for biological waste produced at the CAHF. A 
licensed vendor picks up the waste for incineration as per the regulations of local government. All records 
are maintained and inspected annually by the CCSEA. 
CAHF also conducts regular workshops and training programs to train the faculty and students.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CENTRE FOR SCIENTIFIC AND INTERNATIONAL 
COLLABORATION 
 
Chairman: Prof. Suhel Parvez 
 
The Centre for Scientific and International Collaboration (CSIC) was established in 2024 with aim to 
promote University-Industry linkage with emphasis on exposure for students to real-life examples and 
making them globally competent as mentioned in NEP 2020.Through this centre the students will be 
provided the opportunities with local industry as well as research internships with faculty and researchers, 
which will further improve their employability. 
 
Vision  
1. To promote Research & Development through University-Industry (UI) collaborations in the Jamia 
Hamdard to address relevant problems by engaging the faculty and students. 
2. To develop the skill among students and make them ready for various industries through 
Internships, in various industries to become efficient. 
3. To create training opportunities and apprenticeship opportunities in the industries/ labs/various 
organisations for better exposure and training for students 
4. To conduct specialised Workshops and Training programmes jointly with industry on science and 
technology developments. 
5. To enhance collaborative work for the development of new technologies for the benefit of 
technology transfer. 
 
Roles and Responsibilities  
 
1. 
To facilitate the matters related to various Scientific and International Collaboration with 
Foreign Universities and other Indian Institutions engaged in Scientific Research. 
2. 
To Facilitate the execution of MoU with Foreign Universities and other institutions in India 
and implementation of same in Jamia Hamdard 
3. 
To review implementation/renewal/extension of collaborative agreements done by Jamia 
Hamdard. 
4. 
Facilitation of exchange of experts for conducting projects and consultancy activities for 
development of new technologies. 
5. 
Creation of collaborative degree programmes tailored to fulfil industry needs with emphasis on 
practice and skill development for the aspirants. 
 
CSIC Committee 
1. 
Prof. Suhel Parvez                              Chairman 
2. 
Prof. Syeedun Nisa 
Member 
3. 
Prof. Mohd. Akram 
Member 
4. 
Dr. Nidhi Agarwal 
Member 
5. 
Dr. Sherin Zafar 
Member 
6. 
Dr. Khalid Bashir 
Member 
7. 
Dr. Iqbal Raja Khan 
Member 
8. 
Dr. Mohammad Ahmed Khan      
Convener 
9. 
Dr. Prachi Tiwari 
Member 
10. 
Mr. Syed Mohd Fazalur Rehman 
Member 
11. 
Ms. Naazish Fatima 
Member 
Activities Organized 
1. 
National Conclave on Artificial Intelligence in Education by Delegates from National Institute of 
Plant Genome Research and Cambridge India Research Foundation 
2. 
Interaction with The Climate Reality Project Foundation (TCPF), India and South Asia to create a 
sustainable future by promoting environmentally friendly practices within university 
3. 
The Russian Federation-Embassy of Russia in India, in collaboration with Rus Education, had 
organized the first Russian Indian Educational Summit in New Delhi from 11th to 13th April 
 
 
2024.Hon’ble Vice-Chancellor and Chairman CSIC attended the summit and interacted with various 
Russian Universities for collaboration. 
4. 
Workshop on Good Clinical Practice and Scientific Writing: In Collaboration with CLINScientia for 
skill-based training to students for improving their job readiness for CROs. 
5. 
National Symposium on Clinical Research to provide unique exposure to students on clinical 
research related regulatory aspects. 
6. 
Special Lecture in The University of Western Australia, Institute of Agriculture on topic 
“Neurotransmitters to Plant Signaling Molecule: GABA advancing the salt stress to wheat” 
7. 
Lecture by Shaida Andrabi on Defective Autophagy and Lysosomal Function in Stroke: Mechanisms 
and Therapeutic Strategies 
8. 
Jamia Hamdard Biodiversity Visit by Mr. Joseph T. Miller, Executive Secretary, Global Biodiversity 
Informatics Facility. 
9. 
Jamia Hamdard Signs MoU with Ras Al-Khaimah Medical and Health Sciences (RAK),UAE 
to Strengthen global collaboration in education and foster innovation in learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jamia Hamdard Residential Coaching Academy 
 
 
Jamia Hamdard Residential Coaching Academy (JHRCA) has been established in September, 
2009 for Minorities SCs, STs and Women candidates for coaching, guidance and personality 
development programs to get jobs in central and state services and PSUs. Academy inducts 
candidates through National Level Test followed by Group Discussion and Personal Interview. 
Academy provides free coaching & guidance, 24x7 Library facility and wifi facility in the 
campus. However, academy charges some nominal fee towards hostel maintenance.Since its 
inception, it has trained and coached more than 1400 candidates till date, out of which 350 
candidates (115 candidates have got selected in UPSC-Civil Services Examination and 235 
candidates in State PCS and different other central servicesPSUs) have secured jobs. Over the 
years, the Academy has achieved fairly good results.Mr. Burhan Hussain from our academy 
topped the Central Police Force (CPF)-Assistant Commandant Examination conducted by 
UPSCin 2015. In 2016, Mr. Bilal Mohiuddin IAS secured 10th Rank in UPSC civil Services 
Examination. Mr.Faizul Haseeb IAS secured 36th Rank in 2017,and in 2018, Ms. Nandini 
Maharaj IAS secured 42nd Rank. 
Academic support and guidance along with personality development interventions are emphasized 
at the Academy for holistic development of candidates to face the stiff competition for entry into 
various services. 
Academic Activities 
 
The contextual and required lectures and interactive sessions are conducted by qualified and 
competent resource persons, drawn from respective fields and expertise. The coaching 
program, spread over a period of 10 months, is rigorous and intensive. Regular written Tests 
are conducted to evaluate the performances of the Candidates. 
In addition, personality development of the candidates is emphasized by personal support and 
guidance. Regular interactive sessions with successful Civil Servants are also being 
conducted for the candidates. Group discussions and debates among candidates are 
encouraged to develop communication skills. 
Library 
 
There is a dedicated Library for the candidates of the Academy. Newspapers, periodicals, 
books and notes for civil services are available in the library. The library is kept open for 20 
hours a day on all days of the week. Candidates can also avail the facilities at the Central 
Library of the University. 
Hostel 
 
Hostel facility is provided to all admitted candidates on sharing basis. Hostel rooms are 
equipped with all the basic amenities. Mess facility is open to all the residents of hostel on 
payment. As washing of cloths is not allowed in the Hostel, the Candidates will have to pay 
the laundry charges, separately. The hostel facilities would be provided for a period of ten 
months only. 
 
 
 
 
Director:  Prof. (Dr) M. Afshar Alam 
Contact Details 
Dr. S. S. Ashraf 
Address: Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, 
New Delhi-110062 
Phone Number: 011- 26059686 Ext.No. 5749 
Contact No:  +91 7701847245 ,  7503963911 
Website: www. jamiahamdard.edu 
E. mail: j hrca@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
CENTER FOR DISTANCE AND 
ONLINE EDUCATION 
 
Director: Prof. Mahmooduzzafar 
 
Jamia Hamdard is one of the top ranking Universities of the country. The National Assessmentand 
Accreditation Council (NAAC), Governmentof India has accredited 'A+' Grade to Jamia Hamdard with 
3.41 under 4.0 scale. It has been ranked at 18th position in the year 2019 and 21st in the year 2020 by 
the National Institutional Ranking Frame work (NIRF),Governmen to f lndia. The School of 
Pharmaceutical Education and Research (SPER) has been rankedNo.1 by the NIRF in the year 2017, 
2019 and 2020. 
Jamia Hamdard has thirteen Schools/ Centres of Studies offering high quality Programmes ranging from 
Certificate, Diploma, Undergraduate, Postgraduate and the Doctoral Programmes. They are: School of 
Unani Medical Education and Research, School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, School of 
Nursing and Allied Health Sciences, School of Chemical and Life Sciences, School of Interdisciplinary 
Sciences and Technology, School of Engineering Sciences and Technology, School of Humanities and 
Social Sciences, School of Management and Business Studies, Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and 
Research, Centre for Education, Training and Empowerment, Centre for Media and Mass 
Communication Studies, and the Centre for Distance and Online Education. 
The School of Open and Distance Learning (SODL) of Jamia Hamdard now been renamed as the Centre 
for Distance and Online Education (CDOE) was established in the year 2004, offering various 
undergraduate and postgraduate diploma programmes. Major objective of the CDOE has been to 
provide access to higher education to those who are not able to draw benefits from the formal system of 
education. The open and distance learning system allows a learner to determine his/her pace of learning. 
Our Founder Late Janab Hakeem Abdul Hameed Sahab has established Jamia Hamdard in order to 
extend opportunity of higher education to the disadvantaged sections of the society, especially, the 
Muslim minority. The dream of Late Hakeem Saheb is being fulfilled by offering programmes through 
ODL mode to the students ofa few recognized Madarsas. This is enabling children from the Muslim 
minority dominated pockets of Delhi to get enrolled in the main-stream programmes and courses. 
THE MANDATE  
Open Distance Learning (ODL) mode of education has been recognized as one of the effective tools of 
educationally empowering those sections of the society, which could not afford to join the formal on - 
campus education due to various reasons. As a result, it is an effective tool for non- formal education. 
Presently, ODL institutions are not only imparting education as an alternative to the formal system but 
also making effective contribution in areas, such a vocational and technical education and even in high 
technology-based education. The distance education also has potential to reach to the un-reached and 
even marginalized and excluded groups of the society such as tribal populations and Muslim women. 
Open and distance education provides an opportunity to students for acquiring new knowledge and skills 
that are needed for their development. Jamia Hamdard being in education for along time has taken 
initiatives to offer an opportunity to those students who are unable to get on-campus education and those 
who have limited access to educational resources. The flexible and innovative methods of education of  
 
 
 
 Open and Distance Leaming system ensures 'independent learning' to anyone, anytime and anywhere.    
The ODL Programmes of Jamia Hamdard also envisages providing an opportunity to girls from Muslim 
community, who by and large has been left out by the national educational endeavors. 
Jamia Hamdard's study programmes under ODL are selective and customized to meet the learning 
requirements of knowledge seekers as well as to ensure that they learn at their own pace and 
convenience. Within the financial means of university, due care has been taken to keep the cost of 
education low, so that educationally backward sections can take advantage of University's programmes 
through ODL mode. This goal in view, the CDOE of Jamia Hamdard has madeconcerted efforts to offer 
professional and job-oriented courses with regular updates of curricula and study material and 
introduction of tools of Information Technology. 
THE ACADEMIC PROGRAMMES OF CODE 
The Centre for Distance and Online Education, Jamia Hamdard offers education through ODL and 
Online mode in few selected programmes where University has tremendous strength. The courses are 
designed and developed with views to prepare a cadre of manpower with requisite knowledge and 
professional skills so that they can effectively function in the globalised economy, which is no doubt 
highly knowledge intensive. In its endeavors to cater for education and training needs of different socio-
economic groups, the programmes have been carefully identified to fill the contemporary gaps in 
available courses offered by other institutions and the market demand, and/or to provide cost - effective 
options to the weaker sections of the society, who are unable to reap the benefit of development due to 
lack of adequate education, training and skills. 
The CDOE has been offering career-oriented Programmes. They are: Bachelor of Business 
Administration (BBA), Bachelors of Computer Applications (BCA), PG Diploma in Bio Informatics 
(PGDB), PG Diploma in Chemo Informatics (PGDC), PG Diploma in Dietetics and Therapeutics 
Medicine (PGDDTN), PG Diploma in Drug Regulatory Affairs (PGDPRA), PG Diploma in 
Environmental Monitoring and Impact Assessment (PGDEMIA), PG Diploma in Intellectual Property 
Rights (PGDIPR), PG Diploma in Human Rights (PGDHR), PG Diploma in Medical Record Techniques 
(PGDMRT) since last few years. As per the UGC guidelines; the one-year PG Diploma programmes have 
been renamed as Advance Diploma programme from session 2020-2021.  
Diploma in Professional Arabic (DPA), Diploma in Persian Language (DPL), and Certificate in Modem 
Persian Language (CMPL) had been added in the year 2019- 20 .The BCOM (Hons) had been introduced 
from the session2020-21. 
In 2020-2021 CDOE had launched few Online Programme :-BBA, BCA, BCOM(H) M.A in Human 
Rights and M.A in Islamic Studies Programmes which  have been approved by the DEB/  UGC. The 
Advance Diploma Programmes are approved by the Academic Council of Jamia Hamdard. 
In 2023- 2024 CDOE has launch three new online Programme: - Master in Business Administration 
(MBA), Master in Computer Application (MCA), MA in Political Science (MAPS)  
AIM 
Further, without sacrificing quality of education, cost of education under CDOE has been kept very low, 
facilitating students from the economically deprived sections of the society to get enrolled in to the 
programmes of CDOE and get education of their choice. Poor students, specially, girls are pursuing 
academic career along with their employment 
 
 
PROGRAMMES OF STUDY under ODL Mode 
❖ Undergraduate Programme under ODL mode  
• 
Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) 
• 
Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) 
• 
Bachelor of Commerce (Hons.) B.Com.(H) 
❖ Advance Diploma Programme 
• 
Advance Diploma in Bio-informatics(ADB) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Chemo-informatics(PGDC) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Dietetics & Therapeutics Nutrition(ADDTN) 
• 
Advance Diploma Drug Regulatory Affairs(ADPRA) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Environmental Monitoring and Impact Assessment (ADEMIA) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Intellectual Property Right(ADIPR) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Human Rights (ADHR) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Medical Record Techniques (ADMRT) 
• 
Advance Diploma in Cyber Security  
• 
Advance Diploma in Cloud computing  
• 
Advance Diploma in Big Data Analytic  
 
 
 
❖ DiplomaProgramme 
• 
Diploma in Persian Language (DLP) 
• 
Diploma in Professional Arabic (DPA) 
❖ CertificateProgramme 
• 
Certificate in Modem Persian Language(CMPL) 
PROGRAMMES OF STUDY under Online Mode  
❖ Undergraduate Programme under ODL mode  
● 
Bachelor of Business Administration(BBA) 
● 
Bachelor of Computer Application(BCA) 
● 
Bachelor of Commerce (Hons.)B.Com.(H) 
❖ Post Graduate Programme under Online Mode  
● Master in Human Rights (MAHR) 
● Master in Islamic Studies (MAIS)  
● Master in Political Science (MAPS) 
● Master in Business Administration (MBA) 
● Master in Computer Application (MCA)  
 
 
For any further query regrading admission in various courses of Centre for Distance 
and Online Education please refer to it's Prospectus 2025-26 or refer to the 
websitewww.jamiahamdard.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
JAMIA HAMDARD KANNUR CAMPUS 
 
Jamia Hamdard Kannur Campus is the first constituent unit established by Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi 
under its ambit. The Campus started functioning in November 2013. This campus was the dream 
project of late Shri E. Ahamed who was also a resident of Kannur with the lofty purpose of imparting 
higher education to youngsters of the region. The Campus was opened up with a view to provide 
quality education, to build and shape students for the competitive world. Kannur Campus is involved in 
various innovative programmes apart from teaching regular curriculum. These programmes have been 
carefully designed to provide students a clear edge in placement or further education. The Campus has 
excelled in all disciplines, curricular, extra-curricular and co-curricular activities. It is a young 
educational institute that has made a positive impact on its students, society and other stake holders in a 
very short period. 
Location 
Jamia Hamdard Kannur Campus is ideally located in the heart of Kannur City, which is conducive for 
academic, intellectual and physical pursuits. The Campus is located very near to Arakkal Palace and 
Kannur Cantonment and is only a few kilometers away from Kannur Railway Station, Kannur New Bus 
Stand, Kannur University Thavakkara Campus, and Payyambalam Beach.  
Kannur City was the seat of the erstwhile Arakkal royal family. It had a rich legacy of tolerance and 
religious harmony symbolized by the reciprocal co-existence of the Chirakkal and Arakkal royal 
houses. The cordial relationship between the Hindu Chirakkal family and the Muslim Arakkal family 
had left a great cultural legacy in the region. 
Aims and Objectives 
The Kannur Campus aims to build meaningful partnerships with the corporate, academic, government 
and social sectors that result into sustainable achievements, fulfilling the collective needs of various 
stakeholders and the society at large. We also offer special attention in life skill training, personality 
development, language proficiency and aesthetic development programmes. Kannur Campus offers the 
following courses 
 
Programmes Offered: 
Under Graduate Programmes 
FYUP (Four Year Under Graduate Programmes 2025-26) 
The Four-Year Undergraduate Programme (FYUP)* is an academic framework introduced in line with 
the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020, offering students a flexible and multidisciplinary approach 
to higher education. The program spans four years, with multiple exit and entry options, allowing 
students to earn a bachelor's degree (after 3 years), or an honors/research degree (after 4 years). It 
emphasizes skill development, research opportunities, and holistic learning, integrating disciplines 
across sciences, humanities, and professional studies. FYUGP aims to enhance employability, foster 
innovation, and provide students with a broader knowledge base for future academic and career 
pursuits. The Kannur Campus introduced FYUGP in 2025-26 with the following options: 
 
Three-Year UG Programme 
• 
Minimum 133 credits (max. 180 credits) 
• 
The student will have to do two-year PG programme 
Four-Year UG Programme: UG Honours  
• 
Minimum 177 credits (max. 240 credits) 
• 
The student will have to do one-year PG programme 
• 
In the fourth year the student has to do 11 courses  or 9 courses and an optional Project 
of 8-credits 
 
 
 
 
Admission criteria and Selection Procedure 
 
Passed senior secondary (12th standard/Intermediate) examination from Central Board of 
Secondary Education or any other examination recognized by Jamia Hamdard as equivalent 
thereto, securing at least 55% marks in aggregate. This criterion is applicable to all the above 
under graduate courses offered in the campus. Selection will be based strictly on the merit in the 
qualifying examination. 
 
1. Bachelor of Arts (BA English) (Full-Time Course) 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 Years 
The BA English at Kannur Campus, designed following the latest Four Year Undergraduate 
Programme (FYUGP) and UGC norms, offers a comprehensive curriculum that caters to the 
evolving educational and professional landscape.  
Our course features: 
● Competitive exam tutorials to prepare students for esteemed exams. 
● Skill Enhancement Courses to foster academic and professional excellence. 
● Soft Skill training sessions to develop essential life skills. 
Beyond academics, the Department of English encourages: 
● Literary reading and creative writing to nurture imagination and critical thinking. 
● Participation in national and international colloquiums to broaden perspectives and 
            network. 
By combining academic rigour with extracurricular enrichment, we empower our 
students to succeed in their pursuits and make meaningful contributions to society. 
 
2. Bachelor of Business Administration (BBA) (Full-Time Course) 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 years 
The BBA program at Kannur Campus provides a strong foundation in core business disciplines, helping 
participants to acquire the key competencies needed by all business management students at an under-
graduate level in a diverse field. This undergraduate program is designed to build competencies for 
corporate employment or higher studies. Emphasis is on developing leadership qualities, team 
management, communication skills, stress management, time and crises management etc. to help 
students to deal with the exacting requirements of management executives. This program requires the 
whole-hearted involvement of the students to meet the challenges of academic schedules and 
assignments. 
3. Bachelor of Science in Psychology-(B.Sc. Psychology) (Full-Time Course) 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 years 
B.Sc. Psychology is another important bachelor's programme offered by faculty of Psychology. The 
course structure is designed to enable students to think critically and creatively investigate how human 
beings interact with the environment through the modalities of mind, body and behaviour. 
The course familiarizes the students with various psychological theories and prepares them to assess the 
current psycho-social problems to promote a healthy society. The four year degree course offers intense 
clinic exposure that moulds and enhances student's ability to excel in the field. 
 
4. Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) (Full-Time Course) 
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 years  
 
 
Bachelor of Computer Application (BCA) is a four-year full-time undergraduate program(FYUGP) 
offered by the Department of Computer Science. Students who are keen to join the IT and financial 
services industry can opt for this course. 
 
This degree helps students acquire a comprehensive knowledge of Computer Applications, providing a 
solid foundation for challenging careers in the field of Information Technology. With the updated 
curriculum, students will gain advanced skills in software development, data analysis, and emerging 
technologies, making them industry-ready. 
 
5. Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com. with Computer Applications)  
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 years (Full-Time Course)  
B.Com. with Computer Application offered by the Department of Commerce is a four-year para-
professional undergraduate degree program and is widely accepted by the industry, government and 
private sectors. The curriculum is designed to provide students with excellent opportunities serving as a 
strong foundation for careers as well as for higher studies in the area of commerce. The Department 
nurtures holistic development of the students, to enable them to grow into all- round winners. 
 
6. Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com. with Finance)  
Seats: 60 
Duration: 3/4 years (Full-Time Course)  
B.Com with Finance is a four-year programme offered by the Department of Commerce. The prime 
objective of this programme is to acquire conceptual knowledge of financial accounting and to provide 
knowledge about the technique for preparing accounts in different business organization. It has been 
designed to promote understanding of the issues confronting the business world and the economy as a 
whole. The program will help understand various systems, policy framework, and strategies needed to 
administer the rapid changes in an organization’s globally-oriented environment. This degree 
programme intends to inculcate attitudes and character that will help students evolve into sensitive and 
technically sound future business leaders rather than managers and aims at enhancing the employability 
options of the students. 
 
Post Graduate Programmes 
 
Master of Commerce-M.Com.(Finance) (Full-Time Course) 
Seats: 40 
Duration: 2 years 
The M.Com. Program offered by the Department of Commerce is a two year professional post graduate 
degree program and is widely accepted by the industry, government and privates sectors. 
 
Admission criteria and Selection Procedure 
Passed degree examination from any recognized university or any other examination recognized by 
Jamia Hamdard as equivalent thereto, securing atleast 50% marks in aggregate. This criterion is 
applicable to the above post-graduate course offered in the campus. 
 
Placement Cell 
The Placement Cell of Jamia Hamdard Kannur Campus formed in 2018-19 helps in exploring 
placement opportunities for the students who are in the final year of the programme and are likely to 
graduate at the end of the academic year. The final placements at the Campus are the result of very 
systematic interaction with the industry and continuous career counseling of the students. The 
placement activity is primarily coordinated by the Placement Committee headed by the Convener  
 
 
nominated for the purpose with the help of other committee members comprising of faculties and 
students from various departments. Students who are in their final year and interested in availing 
placement support from institute will have to register themselves for placement. Those who don’t want 
any kind of placement support need not register themselves. Students, who fail to clear the academic 
exams and other formalities at the end of programme shall be removed from the placement process and 
hence will not be eligible for Campus placement activities. Any major disciplinary actions will 
terminate the student from Campus placement activities. Each year we invite companies and host 
recruitments for our students. Placement Cell aims at making available quality placement opportunities 
for the students of our institution. It acts as an inter face between the students and the companies.  
For details please contact :   
Director - 9947135922 / Landline: 0497-2732922. 
Email: jhkofficial@jamiahamdard.ac.in / director.jhk.campus@jamiahamdard.ac.incompanies and host 
recruitments for our students. Placement Cell aims at making available quality placement opportunities 
for the students of our institution. It acts as an interface between the students and the companies. 
 
For details: 
 
Contact Director - 09446715682 / Admin Officer - 09745608088 / Landline: 0497-2732922. 
 
Email: admin_jhkannur@jamiahamdard.ac.in / jhkofficial@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
GENERAL INFORMATION AND 
ADMISSION GUIDELINES 
 
Following admission guidelines shall be adhered to while considering the candidatesfor admission 
in various programs of study at Jamia Hamdard for the academic session 2025-26. 
 
Admission to all Under Graduate programs offered by Jamia Hamdard will be made through merit in NEET 
(UG)/JEE (Main-Paper-I) 2025/ CUET-2025/CLAT-2024, wherever applicable, from amongst the applicants 
who have applied for admission in Jamia Hamdard. In case of other programs, Jamia Hamdard may select the 
candidates for admission on the basis of marks obtained in the Qualifying Examination or Interview or Entrance 
Test or any other mode as approved by the competent authority. 
 
• 
Jamia Hamdard reserves the right to consider applications from Non-NEET (UG)/ Non-JEE / Non-
CLAT/CUET qualified candidates in case of non-availability of suitable rank holders in a particular 
discipline subject to approval of the Competent Authority. 
• 
Applications for all programs offered by Jamia Hamdard shall be accepted online through Online 
Admission Portal 2025. Jamia Hamdard reserves the right to accept applications for some or all programs 
of study offline, if required, subject to approval of the Competent Authority. 
 
• 
 
 
• 
For programs of study governed by various councils, regulatory bodies, admissions will be carried out as 
per their respective guidelines. 
• 
In the best interest of Jamia Hamdard, the Competent Authority of Jamia Hamdard, is authorized to take 
appropriate decision regarding admissions. 
 
Redressal of Grievances of Students 
 
Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi has duly constituted Students’ Grievance Redressal Committees as mandated under 
UGC (Redressal of Grievances of Students) Regulations, 2023 to provide opportunities for redressal of certain 
grievances of students already enrolled in the institution, as well as those seeking admission. The details can be 
accessed at www.jamiahamdard.edu. 
 
Important information and instructions 
 
1. Applicants are advised to read carefully the contents of this Information Bulletin & Prospectus and 
familiarize 
themselves 
with 
the 
relevant 
rules 
governing 
the 
Admission/Entrance 
Test/GD/ 
Interview/Counselling of Jamia Hamdard. They should also check all the eligibility criteria for a particular 
program of study. 
 
2. Jamia Hamdard will not be responsible, if a candidate is denied admission for not fulfilling the eligibility 
criteria even if she/he has cleared all requisite eligibility conditions such as the Entrance Test/GD/ Interview 
merit of qualifying examination and has been issued offer letter for admission to a particular Program of 
study. 
 
3. Bachelor's degree signifies that the degree has been obtained under 10+2+3 or 10+2+4 system of education or 
equivalent. Application Form of candidate whose qualifying examination is not recognized by AIU 
(Association of Indian Universities) or by Jamia Hamdard shall not be considered for admission. 
 
4. For all CUET a related undergraduate course, filling of Jamia Hamdard Application Form is mandatory. 
Candidates who have filled Jamia Hamdard as an option in CUET form but haven’t filled Jamia Hamdard 
application form may not be considered for admission in any programme offered by Jamia Hamdard on the 
basis of CUET score. 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
5. All admissions shall be provisional. If any omission/error in the processing /verification of certificates / 
documents of a candidate or not fulfilling eligibility criteria etc. is detected at the time of admissions or 
thereafter, the University shall have the right to cancel such admission at any time. 
 
6. No change in course preferences in any circumstances will be done after the payment and submission of 
Jamia Hamdard Application Form 
 
7. Display of name of short-listed candidates on the University website / notice board and appearing in Entrance 
Test / GD / Interview/ Counselling, issuance of the Admit Card / Interview letter do not confer any right to a 
candidate to claim admission if he / she does not fulfill all the eligibility conditions prescribed by Jamia 
Hamdard. 
 
8. No candidate will be allowed to enroll in counseling if the candidate has missed the last date of counselling 
due to any reason. 
 
9. The Jamia Hamdard takes no responsibility for any delay or failure in e-mail transmission through website of 
Admit Card / Interview Letter / Intimation Letter etc. or any other communication related to admission as per 
regulations. Jamia Hamdard will take no responsibility if there is failure in email transmission due to wrong email 
id and/or mobile number details filled by candidate in Jamia Hamdard Application Form. 
 
10. Candidates are encouraged to frequently visit the Jamia Hamdard website (www.jamiahamdard.edu) for 
information or to contact the authorized persons as shown in the Contact Details of Online Admission Portal 
2025 at www.jamiahamdard.edu. 
 
11. The Jamia Hamdard shall have the right to change / cancel the schedule of Entrance Test/Interview / GD/ 
Counselling and the display of list of selected candidates at any stage. 
 
12. The Candidates who are not able to download their Admit Card (for entrance test only) must contact for the 
admit card from the Admission Section of Jamia Hamdard at least 2 days before the date of Entrance Test. 
 
13. Any amendments, made in Admission Rules or in the eligibility criteria from time to time, shall be applicable 
to applicants seeking admission in the Jamia Hamdard. 
 
14. If it is discovered at any stage that a candidate has made a false representation or used fraudulent means for 
admission or that she/he does not fulfill the eligibility requirements, she/he will not be allowed to complete 
admission formalities and a FIR against the candidate may be lodged. If admission has been granted to such 
candidate, the same shall be liable to be cancelled at any stage. 
 
15. Candidates must pass their qualifying examination and other previous examinations from the 
Boards/Councils/Parishad/Universities etc. recognized by Jamia Hamdard. If at any time it is found that 
their certificate/degree of qualifying examination/previous examination is from Boards/Councils/Universities 
not recognized by Jamia Hamdard, Jamia Hamdard shall have right to cancel the admission of student. 
 
16. Validity of 10th standard examination (High School) and 12th standard examination (Intermediate/Sr. 
Secondary/10+2) from an Educational Board/ Institution/ Parishad/Council will be considered as 
authenticated/valid, in case an Educational Board/ Institution/Parishad/Council is a member/ recognized by 
the following: 
 
• 
Council of Boards of School Education (COBSE), Delhi 
• 
All Educational Boards/Councils, established under the Act of Parliament by Government of India. 
• 
All Educational Boards/Councils, established under the Act of Legislative Assembly/Council by the 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
State Government (India). 
 
• 
All Educational Boards/Councils as recommended by Regular Committee on Equivalence of 
Examinations, Jamia Hamdard and approved by the Competent Authority of Jamia Hamdard. 
 
17. Validity of Degrees, Certificates, Mark sheets of Universities / Vishwavidyalaya/Jamia / Diploma/ UG/ PG/ 
MPhil/ Ph.D examinations will be considered as authenticated/valid, in case a University/ Vishwaviddyalaya 
/Jamia/ Institution is recognized by the following: 
• 
Association of lndian Universities, New Delhi 
• 
University Grants Commission, New Delhi 
 
18. All Degrees, Certificates, Mark sheets of Universities / Vishwaviddyalaya / Jamia /Institutions as 
recommended/equated by the Jamia Hamdard Regular Committee on Equivalence of Examinations and 
approved by the Competent Authority of Jamia Hamdard. 
 
19. The notified State Madrasa Boards established by state governments such as Uttar Pradesh Board of 
Madrasa Education, State Madrassa Education Board, Assam, Bihar State Madrasa Education Board, West 
Bengal Board of Madrasa Education, Chhattisgarh Madrasa Board, Uttarakhand Madrasa Education Board, 
Odisha State Board of Madrasa Education etc. are recognized by Jamia Hamdard for its regular and distance 
mode courses (as per the eligibility criteria of the courses). 
 
20. A vacancy, created due to the cancellation of admission in a manner mentioned above or due to any other 
reason, shall be filled up by the candidate on merit basis and as per rules of the Jamia Hamdard. 
 
21. Jamia Hamdard reserves the right to ask the candidate to reappear in the Entrance Test / Interview to reassess 
his candidature if considered necessary. 
 
22. Before filling the application form to any course, the applicant should satisfy himself/ herself that he/she 
fulfills the eligibility criteria in terms of educational qualifications, age, (if applicable) or any other 
eligibility conditions etc. 
 
23. Any omission/error on the part of Jamia Hamdard in preparing the merit/admission list, if detected during 
admission process or thereafter shall be liable to be rectified and no candidate shall claim any right for 
admission/continuance of admission (if admitted). 
 
24. As per the resolution of Standing Committee to Academic Council (SC-120(AC)/JH- 1/2007) all material 
related to admissions shall be retained for a period of one year only. 
 
25. For admission to courses, the candidates getting supplementary/ compartment essential repeat in the 
qualifying examination may not be entitled to get admission. However, if and when allowed under special 
conditions as decided by the competent authority then the final result must be submitted by the given date or 
latest by 30th September in any case, if not submitted in time the admission will be cancelled by the Dean of 
the School. 
 
26. For admission to courses, the confidential marks, received directly on or before the last date for receiving the 
mark sheet under sealed cover in the name of Controller of Examinations, Jamia Hamdard, New Delhi from 
the Universities/Boards where the result of qualifying examination could not be declared formally may be 
accepted. Such candidate shall have to submit an undertaking dully Notarized by public Notary to the effect 
that the Original Marks sheet/Grade Sheet of the qualifying examination shall be submitted within the 
stipulated time limit. 
 
27. No candidate is allowed to pursue two regular courses simultaneously in one academic year. Dual attendance 
at any stage will not be permissible. 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
28. No employee of any government / public or private sector organization shall be admitted unless he/she 
submits a Leave Sanction Order with No Objection Certificate from the competent authority of their 
departments, covering the entire/ required duration of the course to which he/she is seeking admission. 
 
29. The list of selected candidates for Counselling / interview/ admission will be displayed on University 
website, www.jamiahamdard.edu. It is the responsibility of the candidate to keep himself / herself informed 
about such notices. The University shall not be responsible if a candidate fails to get information regarding 
his/her selection for GD, interview/ Counselling/admission. 
 
30. In case a candidate fails to report for counseling / admission on the date and time as stipulated, his / her 
claim for admission shall be forfeited and no further correspondence in this regard will be entertained. 
 
31. Non selected candidates for admission shall not be informed. His/her application processing fee will not be 
refunded. Further in all cases of admission online Application Fee /Processing Fee will not be refunded in 
any case. 
 
32. Candidates are required to produce the original documents i.e. mark sheets / certificate/ degrees of qualifying 
examination and other necessary documents and are required to submit self-attested copies of the same at the 
time of reporting for admission. The original documents will be returned to them after satisfying about their 
authenticity, keeping the attested copies for the record. 
 
33. Applicant is advised to ensure that his/her Online Application Form is correctly filled. Application Form 
shall be liable to be rejected in case: 
 
a. Appropriate Fee is not paid 
 
b. Incomplete information is provided in any respect. 
c. Wrong course filled in Online Application Form 
 
d. No further correspondence shall be entertained in this regard. 
 
34. If any discrepancy is found in the examination result of a candidate such as not fulfilling the eligibility 
criteria in terms of Percentage of marks or compartment in any subject or failing in the examination, the 
provisional admission so granted shall be cancelled by the Dean of the concerned School. 
 
35. If a candidate fails to produce the original marks sheet/grade sheet and other documents within time frame, 
the provisional admission so granted may be cancelled. 
 
36. No candidate shall be allowed to take admission to the same Course / Class which she/he has already passed. 
 
37. If a student does not claim their fund of his/her credit balance within one year of leaving the Jamia, the 
amount standing to his/her credit shall be credited to the Jamia Hamdard Scholarship Fund. 
 
38. The Library Security deposit will be refunded only after examination results are announced. If it remains 
unclaimed for more than one year from the date of announcement of the result, it shall not be refunded and 
shall be credited to the Jamia Hamdard Scholarship Fund. 
 
39. No candidates shall be allowed to fill up more than five choices (may up to eight in case of M Pham) in a 
single application form as per existing option. 
 
40. The medium of all Entrance Tests, wherever conducted, shall be English. However, for admission to the courses 
where knowledge of Urdu is essential, the medium of Entrance Test may be English/Urdu or both. 
 
41. Canvassing for admission in any form by a candidate would lead to rejection of his/her application and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
candidature for admission to the course. 
 
42. The candidates once admitted shall be governed by the rules and regulations of Jamia Hamdard. 
 
43. Jamia Hamdard has ZERO TOLERANCE for ragging. Offenders shall be dealt/ punished under prescribed 
laws. 
 
A. As per direction of the Honorable Supreme Court of India, the Government has banned ragging 
completely in any form inside and outside the campus. Whosoever, directly or indirectly, commits, 
participates in, abates or instigates ragging within or outside Jamia Hamdard /JH Off campus, an FIR will 
be lodged against him/her and he/she will be suspended or rusticated from the institution and shall also be 
liable to befined to an extent of Rs. 10, 000/-. In case the applicant is found to have indulged in ragging in 
the past or if it is noticed later that he/she has indulged in ragging, the punishment may include 
suspension from attending the classes, withholding/ withdrawing fellowship/ scholarship and other 
financial benefits or withholding the result, or admission can be refused or he/she shall be expelled from 
JH. 
 
B. The candidates as well as their parents, at the time of admission of the students to the Jamia Hamdard, will be 
required to furnish an undertaking declaring that he/she will not indulge in any form of ragging. 
 
44. Entire Jamia Hamdard is a NO TOBACCO & ALCOHOL-FREE CAMPUS. Smoking and/or consuming 
alcohol in the Campus is an offence. In case anyone violates shall be liable for punishment. 
 
45. Admission completed in a particular category shall not be transferred to any other category until and unless 
eligible for that category as per rules of the Jamia Hamdard before the closure of admissions. A student 
admitted under Self Finance Scheme (SFS) category, for instance, shall not be permitted to transfer to 
general category until and unless he/she is eligible for General category as per rules of Jamia Hamdard 
before the closure of admissions. In the same way a student admitted under NRI/Sponsored/ Foreign 
National category will not be allowed to be transferred to SFS/General category until and unless he/she has 
applied and is eligible for SFS/General category as per rules of Jamia Hamdard before the closure of 
admissions. 
 
46. Jamia Hamdard has the right not to admit a candidate to a course of study even if a notification inviting 
applications for admission to the same has been issued due to any genuine reason or if the number of 
applications received for admission is less than 50% of the sanctioned intake for a particular course. 
 
47. Admission to all the courses will be subject to recognition of the course by the concerned statutory 
Councils/Boards of the Government like NMC, INC, AICTE, UGC, PCI, NCISM, etc. All admission will be 
provisional. In case of non-approval of the course by the concerned Council / Board, the admission to the 
course shall be cancelled and except the processing fee the rest of the fee deposited by the candidate shall be 
refunded in a proportionate manner as per rules of the Jamia Hamdard. 
 
48. Any amendments made in the Admission Rules or in the eligibility criteria by the concerned statutory 
Councils/Boards of the Government like NMC, INC, AICTE, UGC, PCI, NCISM etc from time to time shall 
be applicable to applicants seeking admission or admitted in Jamia Hamdard. 
 
49. To maintain the good quality image of Jamia Hamdard in the public at large, students are advised to be 
appropriately attired in a manner befitting the status of Jamia Hamdard students, when they are on campus. 
 
50. All the matters of dispute shall be subject to Delhi jurisdiction only. 
 
51. Refund Policy: No refund except security deposit will be done after one month or last date of admission, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
whichever earlier. Refund Policy will be as per the norms / directives of UGC/GoI as notified from time to 
time in session 2025-26. 
 
52. It is mandatory for all admitted candidates and their parents to submit a duly signed copy of an anti-ragging 
affidavit, at the time of admission, available at Jamia Hamdard website. Additionally, It is compulsory to fill an 
online Anti-Ragging form by the candidates and their parents: 
https://antiragging.in/affidavit_university_form.php#:~:text=I%20promise%20that%20I%20will,th 
at%20I%20am%20not%20guilty 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
RESERVATION POLICY OF JAMIA HAMDARD 
 
Applicable from the Academic Session 2025-26 
 
The following reservation policy of JH will be applicable to all admissions offered by Jamia Hamdard: 
1. 50 % of total seats in all programs will be reserved for Indian Muslims. * 
2. 50 % of total seats in all programs will be filled up by open merit. * 
*subject to fulfilling short listing criteria of each course. 
Out of 1 and 2 above: 
 
1. One seat in each program where the number of seats is more than 10 will be reserved for the wards of 
currently serving Jamia Hamdard Employees. 
2. 
In case of courses where the number of seats are 10 or less, seats will be merged/ clubbed and accordingly 
the reservation will be offered to the ward of Jamia Hamdard Employees. 
3. 10% weightage in marks of Entrance Exam / Interview / Qualifying Exam will be given to Candidates passed 
out qualifying examination from Jamia Hamdard, 
 
4. 5% weightage in marks obtained in the Entrance Test/ Interview / Qualifying Exam whichever is applicable 
will be given to National/State level Sports Persons. 
 
Sports persons will be considered if he/she has represented State in the National Games/ Championships 
(certificate from National/State Association is to be submitted) or represented India in an International meet 
(certificate from Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports to be submitted). Candidates who will be selected under 
this category may be asked to undergo a trial conducted by the University to verify their claim. Decision of 
the University in this regard shall be final. 
 
5. 5% seats in all programmes/courses will be reserved for Person with Disability (PWD) candidates fulfilling 
defined criteria. 
 
A candidate in order to be eligible for this category should have minimum degree of disability to the extent of 
40%. PWD candidates will have to submit certificate from the competent authority. Furthermore, a candidate 
will become eligible for the benefit under PWD category subject to his/her claim being verified by the 
Medical Board of HAH Centenary Hospital, Jamia Hamdard. This board will also ascertain that the physical 
disability is not considered as a hindrance in pursuing the Program of study that the candidate wishes to be 
admitted to. Decision of this board shall be final and binding. 
 
Only for B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing: Disabled candidates with a disability of loco-motor to the tune of 40% to 
50% of the lower extremity only may be considered for admission and the other eligibility criteria with regard 
to qualification will be same as prescribed for General category candidates. The upper age limit shall be 
relaxed by 5 years for disabled candidates. 
 
6. Seats are also reserved for the wards of Jamia Hamdard Alumni except MBBS, MD, BUMS and MD 
(Unani) where admissions are directly controlled by the respective Councils / Govt. bodies. In case of non-
availability of candidates, the seat(s) may be offered to the General category. 
 
7. 4% weightage in marks of Entrance Test / Interview / Qualifying Exam will be given to the candidates 
passed out qualifying examination from Centre for Distance and Online Education of Jamia Hamdard for 
admission to Jamia Hamdard courses. 
 
8. Weightage of 5% of marks obtained in the Entrance Test / Interview / Qualifying Exam whichever is 
applicable will be given to the SC/ST candidates. 
 
9. The supernumerary seats may be offered in courses as notified by Govt. of India at any time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
IMPORTANT POINTS FOR PARENTS/ GUARDIANS 
 
1. Once a candidate is admitted in Jamia Hamdard to a program of study, parents should discuss with him/her 
the rules and bye-laws governing that program. 
 
2. To appear in the sessional / annual / semester examination, a minimum of 75% attendance (or as prescribed 
by the statutory council) in each paper of all programs of study is mandatory. Students having less than 75% 
(or as prescribed by the statutory council) attendance will not be allowed to appear in the examination in that 
particular paper where they are falling short of attendance. Only 5% exemption in attendance may be given 
on medical ground subject to submission of a valid medical certificate for the duration of the ailment. 
 
3. At the end of every academic session, parents are advised to check the marks sheet of their ward and 
acquaint themselves with his/her performance. 
 
4. Parents are advised to visit Jamia Hamdard website, http://www.jamiahamdard.edu for important notices etc. 
They are encouraged to contact the concerned teacher or Dean/Head of the Department for any problem 
concerning the studies of their ward. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
GUIDELINES FOR ADMISSION OF 
INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS & SPONSORED 
CATEGORY CANDIDATES 
Guidelines for Admission of International Students & 
Sponsored Category Candidates 
There are two categories of international students for admission. They are as follows. 
A. Foreign Nationals &Non-Resident Indians 
B. Sponsored category candidates 
Office of Foreign Students Affairs (FSA): Jamia Hamdard has set up a separate office for 
foreign students affairswhich facilitates the admission of international students. This section 
not only controls the admission of the international students but also provide necessary 
guidance for securing admission. All letters relating to international students will be addressed 
to 'Foreign Students' Advisor' of Jamia Hamdard. Rules framed by University Grants 
Commission (UGC) and notified in its website www.ugc.ac.in will be followed for deciding 
the eligibility and admissions of international students to various courses offered in Jamia 
Hamdard. 
A. Foreign Nationals & Non-Resident Indians 
I. 
International Students- As per the guidelines, 'International Students' will include: 
i. 
Foreign Students: Students holding passports issued by foreign countries and people of Indian 
origin who have acquired the nationality of foreign countries are included as foreign students. 
ii. 
Non-Resident Indians or NRI:  
The term Non Resident India shall be as per the Income Tax Law of India. However, 
notwithstanding any amendment in such laws, all rights, obligations and duties flowing 
from the law and subsisting at the time of submission of application shall be respected 
and mandated till finalization of the program applied for. 
 
 
Admission procedure for international students: 
1. Documents required for admission of International Students - For admission of international students at 
Jamia Hamdard, the following documents are required: 
 
 
i. VISA 
All the International students will require a 'Student VISA' endorsed to this institution or 
permission from Govt. of India for joining full time courses. No other endorsement is 
acceptable. Students wishing to join a research program will require a 'Research VISA' 
endorsed to this institution or permission from Govt. of lndia. The visa should be valid for 
the prescribed duration of the course. 
A visa is not required for NRI students. Students who are doing full time courses in some 
other institutions, do not require a separate visa for joining 'Part Time Courses' provided 
that their current visa is valid for the entire duration of the course. 
ii. No Objection Certificate 
Students do not require a 'No Objection Certificate' for joining professional courses. All 
International Studentswishing to undertake any research work or join a Ph.D. or M.Phil. 
program will have to obtain prior security clearance from the Ministry of Home Affairs and 
the approval of Department of Secondary & Higher Education, Ministry of Human 
Resource Development, Government of India. 
 
 
 
Eligibility qualifications 
The qualifications required for eligibility for admission to different Courses can be checked 
in detail from the prospectus. Only those students who have qualified from foreign 
universities or Boards of Higher Education recognized as equivalent by the 'Association of 
lndian Universities' (AIU) are eligible for admission. When required, a reference will be 
made to AIU to check the equivalence. In case the University /Board is not included in the 
list, the candidate has to obtain and submit a certificate to this effect from AIU (at the 
address given below) by paying the requisite fee. Submission of Equivalence Certificate 
from AIU is mandatory for such foreign nationals. 
AIU HOUSE: 16, Comrade Indrajit Gupta Marg, New Delhi 110002, India. 
Phone nos.: (+91) -11-23230059, (+91)-11-23232429 
Fax: (+91)-11-23232131 
Email: aiu@del2.vsnl.net.in Website: http://www.aiuweb.org 
 
2. Admission of International students 
Admission of all the international students will be done through the foreign 
 Jamia Hamdard. Students will generally be admitted in the 
beginning of the course. However, students can also be admitted as transfer cases in the 
middle of the course from other institutes with which there is an understanding for accepting 
the students as transfer cases. 
The admission of international students is done in two steps: 
First step: 
A student wishing to join Jamia Hamdard gets the information on the courses available, the 
eligibility requirements and admission procedure from the prospectus or the website of Jamia 
Hamdard www.jamiahamdard.edu. Following this the candidate has to register for the course 
of study ONLINE (Also take out the print of online registered application form). 
The Foreign Students Affairs office after getting the eligibility criteria checked and other 
relevant information provided will accordingly issue a Provisional Admission Offer Letter (on 
payment of non- refundable advance amount of 20% of the total annual course fee). This is 
required to get the VISA and to complete other formalities. At this stage, if required, Telecon 
Interview of the candidate may also be conducted. 
After getting provisional admission, the candidate should get the 'Student VISA'/ Research 
VISA (as the casemay be) and complete all other formalities. 
Second step: 
 
Report to Foreign Students' Advisor Office on or before the date of admission, as 
mentioned in the Provisional Admission Offer Letter. 
 
 
 
Get the original eligibility certificates 
verified.  
             Pay the remaining course fee. 
 
3. Transfers and change of course 
An International student who has been granted admission to a particular course shall not be 
allowed to change the course. Transfer from one institution in India to another is also not 
allowed ordinarily. In 
exceptional cases, the 'International Student Cell' may permit this based on the availability of 
the course, eligibility rules and permission of the Competent Authority of Jamia Hamdard. 
4. Government of India Scholars 
International students who are awarded scholarships by the ICCR, New Delhi shall be 
preferred while granting admission and for hostel accommodation. Sponsored candidates 
from different foreign governments for training and for studies are also preferred for the same. 
Stepwise procedure for admission of International 
Students for full time courses:  
Step 1:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Step 2: 
International students should apply on a separate 
form prescribed for foreign nationals/NRI / 
Sponsored candidates. 
The Information Bulletin & Prospectus along 
with Online Application Form for Foreign 
Nationals/NRI may be checked on the Jamia 
Hamdard website www.jamiahamdard.edu. The 
candidate preferably has to apply/register on the 
prescribed form ONLINE. He/she may also 
apply Offline. For this the candidate may contact 
Foreign Students Advisor office. 
The application form registration fee is required 
to be paid through online payment mode or as 
approved by competent authority on case-to-
case 
basis.
 
 
Get the 'Provisional Admission Offer Letter' from the Foreign Students' Advisor Office, in 
order to obtain the VISA (on payment of non-refundable advance amount of 20% of the total 
annual course fee). 
Step 3: 
Submit the 'Provisional Admission Offer Letter' to the Indian Embassy of the respective 
country for obtaining the 'Student VISA'. 
Step 4: 
Report at Jamia Hamdard for admission; Submit the below mentioned documents (in original 
along with the attested photocopies) and get them verified by the Foreign Students Advisor 
office. 
a) Degree/ Pass Certificate of the qualifying examination 
b) Mark list of the qualifying examination 
c) 'Student VISA' in Original 
d) A photocopy of the Passport- duly attested. 
e) Gap Period certificate, if any 
Note:The original certificates will be returned to the students immediately 
after making an endorsement to this effect. 
Step 5: 
Students are required to undergo the medical fitness examination (at any Government 
recognized hospital of Delhi/NCR) and get the medical fitness certificate. 
 
 
Step 6: 
Admission of International INRI students will be confirmed after verification of Valid 
Student/Research VISA; / original certificates, medical fitness test and payment of required 
fees. Even after the admission, at
 
 
 
any stage if it is noted that the qualifying Degree/Certificate is not recognized by AIU, the admission of 
the candidate may be cancelled. Withdrawal of admissions/ refund of fees cases will be dealt as per 
the guidelines of Jamia Hamdard in this regard. 
Step 7: 
International students who are studying for full time courses in any other institution can be 
given admission to Part Time courses, only if they hold a valid visa for the duration of the 
Part Time course. A separate visa is not required. Such students will pay the fee as 
applicable. Jamia Hamdard in consultation with 'International Students Cell' may admit such 
cases directly, if they meet the prescribed eligibility qualifications. 
Step 8: 
Within two weeks of arrival in India, students are required to register their names with the 
police in the 'Foreigner Regional Registration Office (FRRO)' of the Delhi Police. 
5. Examination and award of Degree & Diploma 
The procedure for examination, payment of examination fees, issue of mark sheet, issue of 
passing certificates and award of degrees will be same as for the Indian students doing the 
same courses. 
6. Financial assistance for meritorious students 
There is a provision of discount in fee for the meritorious foreign students. The below 
mentioned criteria will be adopted: 
 
 
Fee concession will be applicable from the II year/III semester (after passing the 1st year/2nd 
semester) and onwards based on performance (results etc.) in a particular program. 
 
25% discount in only annual Tuition fee of the concerned academic year may be 
provided to those foreign national students studying at Jamia Hamdard subject to the 
following terms and conditions: 
o 75% class attendance in the concerned academic year and 85% marks (in aggregate) in the 
concerned academic year or aggregate of two semester exams in a year. 
o The student must have passed all the subjects of the concerned academic year in first attempt. 
 
15% discount in only annual Tuition fee of the concerned academic year may be provided 
to those foreign national students studying at Jamia Hamdard subject to the following 
terms and conditions: 
o 75% class attendance in the concerned academic year and 75% marks (in aggregate) in the concerned 
academic year or aggregate of two semester exams in a year. 
o The student must have passed all the subjects of the concerned academic year in first attempt. 
o Any student who has already availed a discount of any type on admission and course fee will be 
ineligible for any scholarship whatsoever. 
 
 
 
 
7. Withdrawal of admission 
Refund of fee in case of admission withdrawal of foreign nationality students will be as per 
the Jamia Hamdard guidelines. However, in international students case, it will be dependent 
on their date of joining which means that a student will be able to withdraw his admission 
within one month of his date of admission. Date of admission will be counted from the date of 
full fee payment. 
.
 
 
 
8. Attendance 
It is mandatory to have 75% attendance (or as per the rules of regulatory councils) in all 
subjects of the course and English Language Foundation course/Remedial course in English 
(run by Jamia Hamdard, if enrolled) in order to become eligible for appearing in the semester 
or final year examinations.All the students will have to register for every subsequent semester 
along with payment of prescribed fees, there will be no automatic admission to next semester. 
9. Ph.D. program 
International students fulfilling the minimum eligibility criteria for admission to Ph.D. and 
preferably holding a fellowship, submit their applications online or write to the School. They 
may also contact the prospective supervisor or write to the Office of the Foreign Students 
Advisor. Applicants are advised to refer to the Ph.D. Bylaws (available on Jamia Hamdard 
website: www.jamiahamdard.edu) before applying. 
10. Discipline 
The International students should abide by all the rules of Jamia Hamdard and the code of 
conduct as applicable to Indian students enrolled in the same courses 
So far the University has been able to host foreign students from the following countries: - 
 
Afghanistan 
Syria 
Somalia 
Malaysia 
Bhutan 
Libya 
Sri Lanka 
Thailand 
Bangladesh 
Nepal 
Tibet 
Bahrain 
Canada 
Nigeria 
Turkey 
Egypt 
Congo 
Oman 
Ethiopia 
Palestine 
Iran 
Sudan 
         Bahrain 
Malawi 
Iraq 
Saudi Arabia 
Yemen 
 
Tanzania 
South Sudan 
Ukraine 
Uzbekistan 
 
 
 
B. 
Sponsored category candidates Procedure for 
applying. 
1. The Information Bulletin & Prospectus along with Online Application Form for Sponsored candidates 
may be checked on the Jamia Hamdard website www.jamiahamdard.edu 
2. Sponsored candidate should apply/register ONLINE on a separate form prescribed for Sponsored 
candidates. The sponsored candidates will have to submit a sponsorship letter at the time of admission. 
3. The application form registration fee as per the admission guidelines (in Rupees or equivalent in US $) 
is required to be paid through online payment mode or as per the decision by the competent authority 
for foreign nationals. The candidate can also transfer the required amount of fee in the account of Jamia 
Hamdard from any bank or credit card. This should be done well in time, so that the student is able to 
 
 
obtain the VISA and NOC before the due date of admission. 
4. Rest of the admission formalities are same as for the other students. 
Important note for International students and sponsored category 
candidates
 
 
All students desirous of admission at Jamia Hamdard are required to go through the 
General information and guidelines 2025-26. 
Please note that the above rules and guidelines will be strictly followed. In case, 
there are any differences on the interpretation of rules then the opinion of the FSA 
will be final. Students will have to pay the revised fee, when applicable. On the 
points not specifically covered, the decision of competent authorities of Jamia 
Hamdard will be final. 
If the seats reserved for NRI/Sponsored Candidates are not filled, vacant seats will 
be offered to general/SFS category candidates from the merit list. 
Additional 25% of total seats are reserved for Foreign Nationals wherever 
applicable as per MoE,GOI/UGC norms. 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
FEE CONCESSION, SCHOLARSHIPS AND 
 
FELLOWSHIPS - 2025-26 
 
1. Students' Aid Fund 
 
Jamia Hamdard allocates budget under Students' Aid Fund (SAF), which is meant for financial help of the needy 
students. Any student whose parents/guardians have annual income of less than Rest. 4.5 lakh is eligible for 
assistance from SAF, (subject to the availability) on the basis of his/her satisfactory performance in the previous 
year examination and other conditions as laid down by the University. 
 
Fee concession for Indian students 
 
The fee concession will be applicable from the 2nd Year/Third Semester (after passing first year/second semester 
examination) and onwards based on the academic performance of student in a particular course. The eligible 
candidates must apply for the fee concession latest by 30th September of the academic session. 
  
25% concession of Annual Tuition Fee up to 10% of the students in each course subject to merit-cum-means. The 
criteria will be a sunder: 
 
i. 
75% class attendance in the academic year for which fee concession is applied. 
 
ii. 
The student must have secured 80% Marks (aggregate) or above in the examinations of previous 
academic year and passed all the subjects in the first attempt. 
iii. 
The income of the parent of the student must not exceed Rs.4.5 Lakh per annum from all sources. 
 
iv. 
Student must produce a certificate of good performance as evident by the academic record. The 
certificate must be verified by the concerned Head of the Department and endorsed by the Dean of 
School. 
 
Note: The competent authority may grant fee concession in exceptional cases as deemed fit, such as loss in 
natural calamity, death of parents or of the single earning member of the family etc. 
 
SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS 
 
The following scholarships / fellowships are available for the students of JH. This is besides the various 
scholarships and fellowship schemes of the Govt. of India and Delhi Govt. 
 
For Students of All Schools of Jamia Hamdard 
  
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Limited  Ph.D.  students  on  the  basis  of 
Hamdard    National    Foundation 
(HNF) 
Presentation /Interview 
For Undergraduate and Postgraduate General 
Doctoral Fellowship 
students of all courses on the basis of merit- 
cum- means 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
Khawaja Moinuddin Chishti Ajmeri (Gharib 
On the basis of essay writing competition on 
Nawaz merit-cum-means scholarship 
the life and work of Khwaja Gharib Nawaz 
Dr. L. M. Singhvi Gold Medallion (or Silver 
For  the  first  and  second  winner  of  essay 
Shield) of accolade) 
competition on a subject of topical importance 
of interfaith dialogue 
For Students of School of Chemical and Life Sciences 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Mrs. Shakila Naqvi Merit Scholarship 
Muslim female of M.Sc. II yr who secures highest 
marks in M.Sc. I yr 
Tasmia Merit Scholarship 
For a student of M.Sc. II year Biotechnology, on 
the basis of merit 
Noorul Hasan Memorial Scholarship 
Student of II yr of M.Sc. Biotech on merit & need 
Prof. A. K. M.  Ghouse Means-cum-Merit 
Student  of  M.Sc.  II  Year  Botany,  on  merit 
Student of M.Sc. II Year Botany, on  Scholarship 
Scholarship 
Anchrom Means-cum-Merit Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. Chemistry II yr, on merit 
Dr. Manoj Varshney Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. II Year Chemistry on merit 
Khalil Ahmad Merit-cum-means Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. Chemistry on merit and need 
Late Mr C. R. Arora Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. Chemistry Final yr. on merit 
&need 
Syed Ausaf Ali Memorial Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. Chemistry 
Hind Agro Industries Merit Scholarship 
Student of M.Sc. IIyr. Toxicology on merit & 
need 
Tasneema Fellowship 
Female  student  of  M.Sc.  Toxicology  IIyr.,  for 
studies on Regulatory Toxicology 
Late  Hajji  Mohammad  Asif  (s/o  late  Janab 
Muslim   student(s)   in   M.Sc.   (Biochemistry/ 
Mohammad IshaqueSandook Wale) Reward for 
Biotechnology/Chemistry/Botany/Toxicology) II 
knowledgeable student (MARKS) 
year 
Prof. MasroorAlamBaig Memorial Scholarship 
Muslim student of Biochemistry on merit & need 
For Students of School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Late Lady Laiqan-Nisa Award for Meritorious 
Student of M.A. (Islamic Studies) II Yr on merit 
Professional (LAMP) Scholarship 
cum- means who passed all subjects of First Yr. 
Mrs. Aquil-un-NisaAlam Scholarship 
Student of M.A. Islamic Studies, on the 
recommendation of HOD and Dean 
For Students of School of Management Business Studies 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Late Haji Mohammad Ilyas Memorial Initiative 
Muslim student(s) of MBA II year 
for learning and educating student (M-MILES) 
For Students of School of Unani Medical Education & Research 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Hkm Abdul Hameed Fellowship 
For students of M.D. (Unani). 
Maulana Wahid Hussain Memorial Scholarship 
Student of BUMS II Prof. on merit and need 
Dr. Maqbool Husain Jafri Memorial Scholarship 
Student of BUMS II Prof. on merit and need 
  
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
Akhtar Hussain Memorial Merit Scholarship 
Who joins BUMS after Pre-Tib, on merit. 
Late Maulvi Shabbir Ahmad Scholarship 
For a topper of annual examination, Pre- Tib. 
Late Janab Haji Mohammed Ahmed Khan 
Two BUMS II Prof. students on merit-cum- 
Education Reward (MAKER) Scholarship 
means, subject to passing of all papers 
Mrs.Aquil-un-NisaAlam Scholarship 
Student of SUMER on recommendation of 
HoD& Dean 
Fatima Zamir Scholarship 
Female Students of BUMS 
For Students of School of Nursing Sciences and All1ied Heath 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Jamboonathan Means-cum-Merit Scholarship 
Student of B. Sc. (Nursing)II yr. secured highest 
Marks in I yr. 
Mrs. Farida Haque Scholarship 
Student of DGNM I Year, on the basis of means 
only; the student is eligible to receive Zakat. 
Noorul Hasan Memorial Scholarship 
Student of DGNM II Year on merit and need 
Late Lady Nasira-Begum Education Award for 
Student of B.Sc. (Nursing) II yr. on merit cum 
Topper (NEAT) Scholarship 
means who pass all subjects of l yr. 
Musharraf Hussain Jafri Scholarship 
Student of BMLT III Year, on merit-cum-need 
Syed Abdul Karim Scholarship 
Student of DXE II Year on merit-cum-need 
Rais Ahmad Khan Scholarship 
Student of DMRT on financial condition 
Prof. Syed Wahiduddin Scholarship 
Student of DDT II year on merit and need 
Noorul Hasan Memorial Scholarship 
Student of DOTT II Year on merit and need 
Late lady Reshma Parveen Memorial Initiative for Muslim Student(s) of BOT or BPT, B.Sc. (MLT) 
Learning & Educating Students(R-MILES) 
or BETCT, 2nd yr. 
For Students of School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Hakim S.A. Jamil Qadri Memorial Scholarship 
Student of B. Pharm. Iyear on need & eligibility 
Maulalan Shibli Nomani Scholarship 
Student of B. Pharm. II Year (SFS and 
General) who secures highest marks in B. Pharm. 
I Year 
Noorul Hasan Memorial Scholarship 
Student of B. Pharm. II Year on merit and 
Need 
Late  Janab  Haji  Mohammad  Ahmed  for  top 
Two students of B.Pharm. II year on merit cum 
Excellence Award (MASTER) Scholarship 
means who passed all subjects. 
For Students of School of Engineering Sciences and Technology 
Scholarship 
Eligibility 
Prof. S. M. Yahya merit-cum-means Scholarship. 
For a Muslim student of MCA II yr 
 
 
Apart from the above Scholarship/Fellowship given by Jamia Hamdard the office of the Dean Student’s 
Welfare also facilitates the process of verification of the following National & state level 
Scholarship/Fellowship: - 
 
v 
Post Graduate Indira Gandhi Scholarship for single girl child 
 
v 
Post Graduate Merit Scholarship for University Rank holder 
 
v 
Post-Doctoral Fellowship to Women candidates 
 
v 
Rajiv Gandhi National Fellowship for students with Disabilities 
 
 
 
v 
National Scholarship for Minorities 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
v 
E-District Scholarship for SC, ST &OBC students (Delhi) 
 
v 
Post Matric Scholarship (BIHAR) 
 
v 
HAR-CHHATRAVRATI, HARYANA 
v 
National Tribal Fellowship 
 
v 
Bihar Credit Card Loan Scheme 
 
v 
West Bengal Credit Card Loan Scheme 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FEE STRUCTURE 2025-26 
Fee Structure for Indian Students in Indian Rupees 
One-time Fee to be charged in 1st Year only*: 
 
Head 
Indian Students (INR) 
Admission Fee 
5000 
Enrolment Fee 
5000 
Alumni Fund 
3000 
Library Deposit (Refundable) 
5000 
* For any kind of concession or fee waiver this amount will not be included. 
* Lateral Entry Candidates will pay Onetime fee at the time of admission with annual fee. The 
examination and E-governence fee will also be applicable. 
Examination & E-Governance Fee to be charged every year**: 
Head 
Indian Students (INR) 
School of Humanities & Social Sciences 
3000 
All Other Schools 
10000 
E-Governance Fee 
1000 
** Students may submit the examination and E governance fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
Annual Course Fee and all other fee are in Indian Rupees 
School of Chemical and Life Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Certificate Course in Forensic Toxicology 
30000 
- 
- 
- 
B.Sc.(Hons.)(Biotechnology) 
130000 
130000 
130000 
130000 
B.Sc.(Hons.)(Clinical Research) 
115000 
115000 
115000 
115000 
B.Sc. 
(Hons.) 
(Biochemistry, 
Botany, 
Chemistry, Toxicology) 
110000 
110000 
110000 
110000 
B.Sc. (Forestry) 
110000 
110000 
110000 
110000 
B.Sc. (Material Science & Nanotech) 
100000 
100000 
100000 
100000 
M.Sc. (Biochemistry) 
110000 
110000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Botany) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Chemistry) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Toxicology) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) 
120000 
120000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) (SFS) 
220000 
220000 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Clinical Research) 
120000 
120000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Forensic Science) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Pharmacovigilance) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M. Tech.(Biotechnology) 
50000 
50000 
- 
- 
M. Tech.(Biotechnology) (SFS) 
150000 
150000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
School of Unani Medical Education and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E- 
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
5th Year 
Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
22000 
22000 
- 
- 
- 
Pre-Tib 
50000 
- 
- 
- 
- 
BUMS (General) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
150000 
75000 
BUMS (SFS) 
300000 
300000 
300000 
300000 
150000 
MD (Unani) in all Disciplines 
210000 
210000 
210000 
- 
- 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
 
 
 
School of Humanities and Social Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.A (Hons) Islamic Studies 
16000 
16000 
16000 
16000 
B.A. (Politics and Governance) 
25000 
25000 
25000 
25000 
B.A.(International  Studies  and  Global 
Politics) 
52000 
52000 
52000 
52000 
B.A. (Public Policy) 
50000 
50000 
50000 
50000 
M.A (Politics, Governance and Public 
Policy) 
29000 
29000 
- 
- 
Masters of Art in International Studies 
29000 
29000 
- 
- 
M.A (Islamic Studies) 
16000 
16000 
- 
- 
M.A (Human Rights) 
25000 
25000 
- 
- 
M.A. (Political Science) 
22000 
22000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee 
School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E- 
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
D. Pharm 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
B. Pharm (General) 
160000 
160000 
160000 
160000 
B. Pharm (SFS) 
240000 
240000 
240000 
240000 
M. Pharm. (Pharmaceutics, Pharmacology, 
Pharmacognosy & Pharmaceutical Chemistry) 
240000 
240000 
- 
- 
M. Pharm. (Pharmacy Practice, Pharmaceutical 
Quality Assurance, Pharmaceutical   Analysis, 
Pharmaceutical Biotechnology) 
200000 
200000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
School of Engineering Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E- 
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering) 
220000 
220000 
220000 
220000 
B.Tech. 
(Electronics 
& 
Communication 
Engineering) 
160000 
160000 
160000 
160000 
B.Tech. (CSE) Artificial Intelligence 
240000 
240000 
240000 
240000 
BCA 
130000 
130000 
130000 
- 
Bachelor of Science (Hons) Computer Science 
120000 
120000 
120000 
120000 
M.Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering) 
90000 
90000 
- 
- 
M.Tech. (CSE) with Specialization in Data 
Science 
100000 
100000 
- 
M.Tech. Computer Science &Engineering with 
Specialization 
in 
Cyber 
Forensics 
& 
Information Security 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
MCA 
180000 
180000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Computational Biology and Systems 
Biology and Bioinformatics) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E- 
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Food Technology) 
175000 
175000 
175000 
175000 
B.Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
100000 
100000 
100000 
100000 
M. Tech. (Food Technology) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
110000 
110000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Medical Virology) 
90000 
90000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Nutrition and Dietetics) 
120000 
120000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Food Science) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Environmental Science and Sustainable 
Development) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. Microbiology 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Institute of Skills Development (ISD) (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra only 
in B.Voc Programs) 
B.Voc (Patient Care 
Management with 
specialization in Palliative 
Care and Geriatric Care) 
4 Year 
25 
 
80000 
B.Voc (Automotive 
Manufacturing 
Technology) 
4 Year 
25 
 
80000 
B.Voc in Retail 
Management/Marketing 
with Specialization in 
Automotive Sector 
4 Year 
25 
 
80000 
B.Voc in Financial 
Analytics/Banking, 
Financial Services and 
Insurance 
4 Year 
25 
 
80000 
Genetic Counsellor 
6 Months with OJT 
30 
 
20000 
Pre-school & Daycare 
Facilitator 
6 Months with OJT 
30 
 
20000 
Cyber Security 
9 Months with OJT 
30 
 
20000 
Script Writer 
6 Months with OJT 
30 
 
20000 
Data Science/Analytics 
12 Months with OJT 
30 
 
20000 
Animation/VFX Editor 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Social Media Executive 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Digital Marketing 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Electric Vehicle (EV) 
Service Technician 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Drone Service Technician 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Drone Manufacturing 
Technician 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
Equity Trading 
6 Months with OJT  
30 
 
20000 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Management and Business Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
BBA 
130000 
130000 
130000 
130000 
Bachelor of Management Studies-Healthcare 
Management 
130000 
130000 
130000 
130000 
Bachelor of Hotel Management 
120000 
120000 
120000 
120000 
Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com.) 
120000 
120000 
120000 
120000 
MBA in all disciplines 
260000 
260000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
Centre for Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination 
& E-Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Bachelor  of  Arts  in  Journalism  &  Mass 
Communication 
160000 
160000 
160000 
160000 
B.A. Film Making 
100000 
100000 
100000 
100000 
M.A. in Journalism and Mass Communication 
150000 
150000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E- 
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
5th Year 
B.A.-LL. B-Integrated Course 
200000 
200000 
200000 
200000 
200000 
LL.M. (Master of Laws) 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
- 
LL.M. (Master of Laws) Part-Time 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
School of Nursing Sciences and Allied Health (SNSAH) 
Rufaida College of Nursing (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Diploma in General Nursing and Midwifery (DGNM) 
80000 
80000 
80000 
- 
B. Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
140000 
140000 
140000 
140000 
 
 
Post Basic B. Sc. Nursing 
100000 
100000 
- 
- 
M. Sc. Nursing in all Disciplines 
110000 
110000 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
Department of Physiotherapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Bachelor of Physiotherapy (BPT) 
165000 
165000 
165000 
165000 
Master of Physiotherapy (MPT)(Cardiopulmonary, 
Musculoskeletal, Neurology, Sports) 
170000 
170000 
- 
- 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
Department of Occupational Therapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance 
Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Bachelor of Occupational Therapy (BOT) 
145000 
145000 
145000 
145000 
Master of Occupational Therapy (MOT) 
160000 
160000 
- 
- 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
Department of Paramedical Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance 
Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Diploma in X-Ray & ECG 
45000 
45000 
- 
- 
Diploma in Operation Theatre Techniques 
45000 
45000 
- 
- 
Diploma in Dialysis Techniques 
55000 
55000 
- 
- 
B. Sc. MLT (BMLT) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
85000 
B. Sc. Medical Imaging Techniques (BMIT) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
85000 
B. Sc. Anesthesia& Operation Theatre Techniques (BOTT) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
85000 
Bachelor of Optometry (BOPT) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
85000 
B. Sc. Cardiology Laboratory Techniques (BCLT) 
150000 
150000 
150000 
85000 
B. Sc. Dialysis Techniques (BDT) 
120000 
120000 
120000 
60000 
B. Sc. Emergency & Trauma Care Techniques (BETCT) 
125000 
125000 
125000 
62500 
Bachelor in Audiology and Speech - Language Pathology 
140000 
140000 
140000 
70000 
M.Sc. (Medical Lab Sc.) 
90000 
90000 
- 
M.Sc. (Medical Radiology and Imaging Techniques) 
150000 
150000 
- 
M.Sc. (Anesthesia and Operation Theatre Techniques) 
110000 
110000 
- 
M.Sc. (Dialysis Techniques) 
110000 
110000 
- 
Master of Optometry 
110000 
110000 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fee Structure for NRI/ Industry 
Sponsored & Foreign Nationals in US $ 
 
Onetime Fee to be charged in 1st Year only*: 
 
Head 
Foreigners 
Admission Fee 
US$ 150 
Enrolment Fee 
US$ 150 
Alumni Fund 
US$ 200 
Library Deposit (Refundable) 
US$ 200 
 
* For any kind of concession or fee waiver this amount will not be included. 
 
* Lateral Entry Candidates will pay Onetime fee at the time of admission with annual fee. The 
examination and E-governence fee will also be applicable. 
 
Examination Fee to be charged every year**: 
 
Head 
Foreigners 
School of Humanities & Social Sciences 
US$ 300 
All Other Schools 
US$ 300 
E-Governance Fee 
Rs 1000 
 
** Students may submit the examination and E governance fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Chemical and Life Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.Sc.  (Hons.)  (Biochemistry,Chemistry,  Botany 
$ 2200 
$2200 
$2200 
$2200 
and Toxicology) 
B.Sc. (Hons.) (Biotechnology, Clinical Research) 
$ 2300 
$2300 
$2300 
$2300 
M.Sc. (Biochemistry) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Biotechnology) 
$3000 
$3000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Botany) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Chemistry) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Toxicology) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Clinical Research) 
$3000 
$3000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Forensic Science) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Tech.(Biotechnology) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
M.Tech.(Biotechnology) (SFS) 
$2200 
$2200 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
School of Unani Medical Education and (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 3rd Year 
4thYear 5th Year 
Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
$ 900 
$ 900 
- 
- 
- 
BUMS 
$ 4500 
$ 4500 
$ 4500 
$ 4500 
$ 2250 
MD (Unani) in all Disciplines 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
- 
- 
 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
 
School of Humanities and Social 
Sciences 
(Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance
Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.A. (Hons) Islamic Studies 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
B.A. (Politics and Governance) 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
B.A.   (International   Studies   and 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
Global Politics) 
M.A (Politics, Governance and Public 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
Policy) 
Masters   of   Art   in   International 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
Studies 
M.A. (Islamic Studies) 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
M.A. (Human Rights) 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
M.A. (Political Science) 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
D Pharm 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
- 
- 
B. Pharm 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
M. Pharm. (Pharmaceutics, Pharmacology) 
$ 3900 
$ 3900 
- 
- 
M. Pharm. (Pharmaceutical Chemistry, 
$ 3750 
$ 3750 
- 
- 
Pharmacognosy, Pharmacy Practice, 
Pharmaceutical Quality Assurance, 
Pharmaceutical Analysis, Pharmaceutical 
Biotechnology) 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Engineering Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering) 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
and B.Tech. (CSE) Artificial Intelligence 
 
 
 
 
B.Tech.  (Electronics  &  Communication 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
Engineering) 
BCA 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
- 
Bachelor  of  Science  (Hons.)  Computer 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$2500 
Science 
M.Tech. Computer Science & Engineering- 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M.Tech.(CSE) 
M.Tech.(CSE) with Specialization in Data 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
Science 
M.Tech. Computer Science &Engineering 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
with Specialization in Cyber Forensics & 
Information Security 
MCA 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Computational Biology and Systems 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
Biology and Bioinformatics) 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Food Technology) 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
B.Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
M. Tech. (Food Technology) 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Medical Virology) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Food Science) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc.  (Environmental  Science  and 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
Sustainable Development) 
M.Sc. (Nutrition and Dietetics) 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Management and Business Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance 
Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
BBA 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
Bachelor of Management Studies- 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
Healthcare Management 
Bachelor of Hotel Management 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
Bachelor of Commerce (B.Com) 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
MBA in all Disciplines 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
-
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Bachelor of Arts in Journalism & Mass 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
Communication 
 
M.A. in Journalism and Mass 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
- 
- 
Communication 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
5th Year 
B.A.-LL.B.-Integrated Course 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
LL.M. (Master of Law) 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
- 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Nursing Sciences and Allied Health 
 
Rufaida College of Nursing (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
DGNM 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
M. Sc. Nursing in all disciplines 
$ 2500 
$ 2500 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee 
 
Department of Physiotherapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd 
Year 
4th Year 
BPT 
$ 3100 
$ 3100 
$ 3100 
$ 3100 
MPT(allDisciplines) 
(Cardiopulmonary
, 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
-
- 
Musculoskeletal, Neurology, Sports) 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Department of Occupational Therapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd 
Year 
4th Year 
BOT 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
MOT in all Disciplines 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
- 
- 
 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
 
 
 
 
Department of Paramedical Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd 
Year 
4th Year 
Diploma in X-Ray & ECG Techniques 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
Diploma in Operation Theatre Techniques 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
Diploma in Dialysis Techniques, 
$ 1500 
$ 1500 
- 
- 
B.Sc. MLT (BMLT) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
B.Sc. Emergency & Trauma Care Techniques ((BETCT) $ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
Bachelor of Optometry (BOPT) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
B. Sc. Medical Imaging Techniques (BMIT) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
B.Sc.  Anesthesia&  Operation  Theatre  Techniques 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
(BOATT) 
B. Sc. Cardiology Laboratory Techniques (BCLT) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
B. Sc. Dialysis Techniques (BDT) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
B.Sc. in Audiology and Speech – Language Pathology 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
$1100 
M.Sc. (Medical Lab Sc.) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Medical Radiology and Imaging Tech.) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Anesthesia& Operation Theatre Techniques) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Dialysis Techniques) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
Master of Optometry 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
FEE STRUCTURE FOR SAARC COUNTRIES 
NATIONALS (EXCEPT INDIANS) IN US $ 
 
Onetime Fee to be charged in 1st Year only*: 
 
Head 
NRI/Sponsored 
Admission Fee 
US$ 150 
Enrolment Fee 
US$ 150 
Alumni Fund 
US$ 200 
Library Deposit (Refundable) 
US$ 200 
 
]  
* For any kind of concession or fee waiver this amount will not be included. 
 
* Lateral Entry Candidates will pay Onetime fee at the time of admission with annual fee. The 
examination and E-governence fee will also be applicable. 
 
Examination Fee to be charged every year**: 
 
Head 
NRI/Sponsored 
School of Humanities & Social Sciences 
US$ 300 
All Other Schools 
US$ 300 
E-Governance Fee 
Rs 1000 
 
** Students may submit the examination and E governance fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Chemical and LifeSciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.Sc. (Hons.) (Biotechnology, Clinical 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
Research) 
B.Sc. (Hons.) 
(Biochemistry, Botany, 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
Chemistry, Textile Chemistry, Toxicology) 
M. Sc. (Biochemistry) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Biotechnology) (Reg & SFS) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Botany) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Chemistry) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Toxicology) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Clinical Research) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Forensic Science) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Tech. (Biotechnology) 
$2000 
$2000 
- 
- 
M. Tech. (Biotechnology) (SFS) 
$2000 
$2000 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
School of Unani Medical Education and (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
5th Year 
Diploma in Unani Pharmacy 
$ 600 
$ 600 
- 
- 
- 
BUMS 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 4000 
$ 2000 
MD    (Unani)    in    all 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
- 
- 
Disciplines 
* Students may submit the Fee semestewise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
School of Humanities and Social Sciences 
(Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance 
Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.A. (Hons) Islamic Studies 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
B.A. (Politics and Governance) 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
B.A. (International Studies and Global 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
Politics) 
M.A. (Politics, Governance and Public 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
- 
- 
Policy) 
Master of Art in International Studies 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
- 
- 
M.A. (Islamic Studies) 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
- 
- 
M.A. (Human Rights) 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
- 
- 
M.A. (Political Science) 
$ 1200 
$ 1200 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 3rd Year 
4th Year 
D. Pharm. 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
B. Pharm. 
$ 3700 
$ 3700 
$ 3700 
$ 3700 
M. Pharm. (Pharmaceutics, Pharmacology) 
$ 3500 
$ 3500 
- 
- 
M. 
Pharm. 
(Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry,
$ 3250 
$ 3250 
- 
- 
Pharmacognosy, 
Pharmacy 
Practice,
Pharmaceutical 
Quality 
Assurance,
Pharmaceutical 
Analysis, 
Pharmaceutical
Biotechnology) 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Engineering Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Computer Science & Engineering) 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
And B.Tech. (CSE) Artificial Intelligence 
B.Tech. 
(Electronics 
& 
Communication 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
$ 3000 
Engineering) 
BCA 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
Bachelor of Science (Hons.) Computer Science 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
M.Tech. Computer Science & Engineering-M.Tech. 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
(CSE) 
M.Tech. (CSE) with Specialization in Data Science 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M.Tech.  Computer  Science  &Engineering  with 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
Specialization  in  Cyber  Forensics  &  Information 
Security 
MCA 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Computational Biology and Systems Biology 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
and Bioinformatics) 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
B. Tech. (Food Technology) 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
$ 3200 
B.Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
M. Tech. (Food Technology) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Food Science) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M. Sc. (Biomedical Science) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Medical Virology) 
$ 1700 
$ 1700 
- 
- 
M.Sc. (Nutrition and Dietetics) 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
M.Sc.  (Environmental  Science  and 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
- 
- 
Sustainable Development) 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
School of Management and Business Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee 
Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
BBA 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
Bachelor  of  Management  Studies- 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
Healthcare Management 
Bachelor of Hotel Management 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
Bachelor of Commerce (B. Com) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
MBA in all Disciplines 
$ 3600 
$ 3600 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Centre for Media and Mass Communication Studies (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
  
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Bachelor of Arts in Journalism & Mass 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
Communication 
M.A.inJournalismandMass 
$ 2100 
$ 2100 
- 
- 
Communication 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-
Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 3rd Year 
4th Year 
B.A.-LL.B-Integrated Course 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
LL.M. (Master of Law) 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
School of Nursing Sciences and Allied Health 
 
Rufaida College of Nursing (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
DGNM 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
Post Basic B.Sc. Nursing 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
M. Sc. Nursing in all disciplines 
$ 2200 
$ 2200 
- 
- 
* Students may submit the Fee semester wise which will be the 50% of Annual Fee. 
 
Department of Physiotherapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
  
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
BPT 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
$ 2600 
MPT 
(all 
Disciplines)
$ 3100 
$ 3100 
- 
- 
(Cardiopulmonary, 
Musculoskeletal,
Neurology, Sports) 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
 
Department of Occupational Therapy (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
BOT 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
$ 2300 
MOT in all Disciplines 
$ 2800 
$ 2800 
- 
- 
 
* Students may pay the annual fee in two installments. 
 
Department of Paramedical Sciences (Onetime Fee & Examination & E-Governance Fee Extra) 
 
Course 
1st Year 
2nd Year 
3rd Year 
4th Year 
Diploma in X-Ray & ECG Techniques 
$ 1300 
$ 1300 
- 
- 
Diploma in Operation Theatre Techniques 
$ 1300 
$ 1300 
- 
- 
Diploma in Dialysis Techniques 
$ 1300 
$ 1300 
- 
- 
B.Sc. MLT (BMLT) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
B.Sc.  Emergency  &  Trauma  Care  Techniques 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
(BETCT) 
Bachelor of Optometry (BOPT) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
B. Sc. Medical Imaging Techniques (BMIT) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
B.Sc. Anesthesia& Operation Theatre Techniques 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
(BOATT) 
B. Sc. Cardiology Laboratory Techniques (BCLT) 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
B. Sc. Dialysis Techniques (BDT) 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
$900 
Bachelor  in  Audiology  and  Speech  -  Language 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$ 2000 
$1000 
Pathology 
M.Sc. (Medical Lab Sc.) 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
M.Sc.(MedicalRadiologyandImaging 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
Techniques) 
Master of Optometry 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
M.Sc.   (Anesthesia   and   Operation   Theatre 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
Techniques) 
M.Sc. In Dialysis Techniques) 
$ 1800 
$ 1800 
- 
- 
 
 
 
Fee Structure of Ph.D. (Full Time/Part Time) Programmes 
Indian Students in Indian Rupees (INR) 
 
 
School 
ONE TIME FEE 
ANNUAL FEE 
Admission 
Fee 
Enrolment 
Fee 
Library 
Deposit 
Alumni 
Fund 
Course 
work Fee 
Contingency 
Fee 
Annual 
Fee* 
E- 
Governance 
Fee 
Chemical and Life Sciences 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Pharmaceutical Education & 
Research 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical 
Medicine (Pharmaceutical 
Education & Research) 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Ph.D. in Pharmaceutical 
Medicine –industry sponsored 
candidates 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
100000 
1000 
Nursing and Allied Health 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Humanities and Social Sciences 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
NIL 
40000 
1000 
Interdisciplinary Sciences & 
Tech. 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Medical Sciences 
(HIMSR & SUMER) 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Management & Business Studies 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
NIL 
40000 
1000 
Engineering Sciences & 
Technology 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
20000 
40000 
1000 
Hamdard Institute of Legal 
Studies and Research 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
NIL 
40000 
1000 
Part Time & Executive PhD 
Programme (Wherever 
applicable) 
10000 
5000 
10000 
3000 
6000 
NIL 
100000 
1000 
Please Note: Additionally, Exam Fee of Rs. 30000/- will also be applicable at the time of thesis submission only. 
 
*The Annual Fee for PhD Fees (Part-Time) for the part-time/ industry sponsored and MOU candidates from 
non-governmental organizations/ institutions will be Rs 100000/- 
  
The Annual Fee for PhD Fees MOU candidates from Government Organizations/Institutions such as IITR, 
CDRI, etc will be Rs 40000/- 
• 
No Contingency will be charged from the candidates under MoU category, candidate availing their independent fellowships, 
candidates working in sponsored projects. 
 
 
 
Foreign Nationals in US$ 
 
School 
ONE TIME FEE 
ANNUAL FEE 
Admission 
Fee 
Enrolment 
Fee 
Library 
Deposit 
(Refundable) 
Alumni 
Fund 
Course 
work Fee 
(INR) 
Contingency 
Fee* (INR) 
Annual 
Fee 
E- 
Governance 
Fee (INR) 
Chemical and Life 
Sciences 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Pharmaceutical 
Education & Research 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
PhD programme 
(Pharmaceutical 
Medicine) for industry 
sponsored candidates 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 3500 
1000 
Nursing and Allied 
Health 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Humanities and Social 
Sciences 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 2500 
1000 
Interdisciplinary 
Sciences & Tech. 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Medical Sciences 
(HIMSR & SUMER) 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Management & 
Business Studies 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 2500 
1000 
School of Engineering 
Sciences & Technology 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Hamdard Institute of 
Legal Studies and 
Research 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 2500 
1000 
Part Time & Executive 
PhD Programe (Wherever 
applicable) 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 3500 
1000 
Please Note: Additionally, Exam Fee of Rs. 30000/- will also be applicable at the time of thesis submission only. 
• 
No Contingency will be charged from the candidates under MoU category, candidate availing their 
independent fellowships, candidates working in sponsored projects. 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
Ph.D. Fees for SAARC Countries Nationals (Excluding Indian Nationals) in US $ 
School 
ONE TIME FEE 
ANNUAL FEE 
Admission 
Fee 
Enrolment 
Fee 
Library 
Deposit 
(Refundable) 
Alumni 
Fund 
Course 
work fee 
(INR) 
Contingency 
Fee In Indian 
Rs. (INR) 
Annual 
Fee 
E- 
Governance 
Fee (INR) 
Chemical and Life Sciences 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
Pharmaceutical Education & 
Research 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
PhD programme (Pharmaceutical 
Medicine) for industry sponsored 
candidates 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 2500 
1000 
Nursing Sciences and Allied Health 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
Humanities and Social 
Sciences 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 1500 
1000 
Interdisciplinary Sciences & Tech. 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
Medical Sciences (HIMSR & 
SUMER) 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
Management & Business Studies 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 1500 
1000 
School of Engineering Sciences & 
Technology 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
20000 
$ 1500 
1000 
Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies 
and Research 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 1500 
1000 
Part Time & Executive PhD 
Programme (Wherever applicable) 
$ 150 
$ 150 
$ 200 
$ 200 
6000 
NIL 
$ 2500 
1000 
 
 
 
 
 
Please Note: Additionally, Exam Fee of Rs. 30000/- will also be applicable at the time of thesis submission only. 
• 
No Contingency will be charged from the candidates under MoU category, candidate availing their 
independent fellowships, candidates working in sponsored projects. 
• 
 
     General Note: 
• 
The fee for supplementary examinations (if applicable) will be charged separately as per rules of the 
University. 
• 
A late fee of Rs 50 per day (Ph.D. program) will be imposed from the 15th day of the completion of the first 
year of the fee (i.e. date of first fee submission). 
• 
Ph.D. programme re-registration fee of Rs. 10,000 (Besides this fee, half year Ph.D. fee for less than 6 
months extension and one year fee for more than six months extension is to be paid.) 
• 
Ph.D. programme tenure extension fee (one year basis) of Rs. 10,000 (Besides this fee, annual fee of one year 
will be required to be paid. 
• 
From teaching and non-teaching employees of Jamia Hamdard registered for Ph.D. programme fees will be 
charged as per rules. 
• 
For Certificate Programe/Diploma/UG/PG/PhD Education tour (if any) charges (where ever applicable) will 
be as per actual. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Annual Hostel Fee for 2025-2026 and Important Points 
 
BOYS: 
 
Ibn-e-Battuta Hostel 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee in INR 
1. 
Under Graduate, Post Graduates & 
Non-AC Dormitory 
Four-Seater 
60,000/- 
PhD Students 
2. 
UnderGraduate, Post Graduates & 
AC Room 
Double/Triple 
1,30,000/- 
PhD Students 
Seater 
Jawahar Lal Nehru International Hostel 
 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee in US Dollars 
For Indians 
(For Foreigners 
(INR) 
and NRIs) 
1. 
Under Graduates, Post Graduates 
AC 
Double / 
US$ 2000 
1,30,000/- 
and   Ph.D.   students   (NRIs, 
Room 
Triple Seater 
International Students) 
 
GIRLS: 
 
Razia Sultan Hostel 
 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee (In 
Rupees) 
1. 
JHRCA & Any stream 
AC* 
Double Seater 
1,30,000/- 
2. 
Scholar House 
Non-AC 
Double Seater 
1,00,000/- 
 
 
Ibn-e-Sina Hostel 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee in INR 
1. 
Any stream, however, preference 
Non-AC 
Triple Seater 
INR 70,000/- 
will be given to Post Graduate & 
Double Seater 
INR 70,000/- 
PhD students 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
2. 
Any stream, however, 
Non-AC 
Dormitory 
INR 60,000/- 
preference will be given to Post 
Graduate & PhD students 
 
Rabia Girls Hostel 
 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee in INR 
1. 
Postgraduates and Undergraduates 
Non-AC 
Dormitory 
INR 55,000/- 
 
Abdul Mueed Hall of Residence Hostel (AMHR) 
 
S.No. 
Eligibility 
Type 
Capacity 
Fee 
1. 
Graduate and Postgraduate Streams  
AC 
Double Seater 
INR 1,30,000/- 
 
2. 
Postgraduates,   Undergraduates   & 
Non-AC 
Dormitory 
INR 60,000/- 
JHRCA CWC candidates 
3. 
Any Stream* 
AC 
Single Rooms 
INR 2,50,000/- 
 
 
Foreigners/ NRI’s/ Sponsored 
 
 
1. 
Foreigners & NRI/sponsored* 
AC 
Double Seater 
US$ 2000 
2. 
Foreigners & NRI/sponsored* 
AC 
Single Room 
US$4000 
*Seats will be allotted subject to availability. 
*AC services in summer season may be regulated due to load shedding. 
OTHER CHARGES (MANDATORY) 
S. No 
CHARGES 
FEES (INR) 
1. 
One time Security Deposit (Refundable at the time of 
10,000/- 
vacating the hostel) 
2. 
Annual Mechanical Laundry 
4,110/- 
3. 
Monthly Mess Charges (An advance payment of mess 
Male Hostler-2,500/- 
charges for 5 months will be required at the time of 
Female Hostler-2,700/- 
joining) 
Non- Hostlers/Residents/Staff 
3,000/- 
  
Important Note: 
 
1. Late fee fine of Rs.100/- per day till the date of actual fee payment will be levied. 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
2. Rs.5000/- fine for Non-ACroom and Rs.10,000/- fine for AC roomwill be levied if the annual 
hostel fee for the entire academic year 2025-2026 is paid in two instalments at the time of Hostel 
allotment. 
 
General Rules for Hostel and Hostel Fee 
 
1. NRI foreigners / MBBS seats (Air-conditioned) which go vacant in AMHR hostel will be filled by Indian 
students desirous of taking NRI seat. However, they may not be charged in dollars but prevailing MBBS seat 
charges of AC double room i.e. Rupees 1,30,000/-, to be given on first cum first basis for the academic 
session 2025-2026. 
 
2. The Hostel fee shall be charged for the whole academic year. In case a candidate is allotted in the middle of 
academic year, the hostel charges shall be calculated at quarterly basis. 
 
First Quarter: 
1st July to 30th September 
Second Quarter: 
1st October to 31st December 
Third Quarter: 
1st January to 31st March 
Fourth Quarter: 
1st April to 30th June 
 
3. “In case, a student does not join the hostel, but informs the Provost Office within a week after 
payment of hostel fee about his withdrawal, then the hostel charges will be refunded after deducting 
Rupees one thousand and if he/she withdraws admission within one month joining of the hostel, fee 
will be refunded after deducting 25% of the hostel fees. In any other case, no fee except Security 
Deposit is refundable, which will be refunded to the hosteller after he/she has paid all dues and 
vacated the hostel.” 
 
4. The above rates are exclusive of Mess and Laundry fee. Mess and Laundry fee shall be intimated at the time 
of admission. 
 
5. A hostler will have to deposit an amount of Rs. 10,000/- as Hostel Security Money (Refundable). The 
Security money will not be refunded if a student over stays in the hostel for more than a month after the last 
examination held for a particular course. Students can claim the security deposit within one year from the 
date of hostel vacation. 
 
6. Allotment in the hostel will be for one academic year only. Allotment of Hostel for subsequent years shall be 
afresh and at rates as prevalent at that time. 
 
7. The Annual Hostel Fees would be applicable for academic Session 2025-2026. 
 
8. Hostellers will have to vacate the hostel at the end of the academic session (after annual/semester 
examinations). Seats in the hostel would be re-allotted to the students in the month of July when the new 
academic session begins. 
 
9. Mechanical Laundry Facility is available and is mandatory for hostellers in the University. The resident will 
have to deposit the annual Laundry charge for washing of clothes as per rules of the University along with 
Annual Hostel Fee. The charges will be decided by the University every year and shall be intimated at the 
time of admission. 
 
10. It will be incumbent upon the student admitted to the hostel to join the mess and pay mess charges for 5 
months in advance at the rates prescribed from time to time. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
11. All seats are allotted on first cum first serve basis FOR ONE YEAR ONLY. The university reserves the 
right to allot/ not allot seats to whosoever it deems fit. Candidates living in far off places of Delhi/NCR shall 
be given preference only after allotting seats to Non-Delhi candidates. 
 
12. At the time of admission to hostel, a declaration to abide by Hostel Code of Conduct must be signed by 
student and parent/guardian. 
 
13. AC facility in AC rooms is limited only to the summer season in the form of window AC. There is no 
provision of central heating or central air conditioning for the same in the months of winter/cool 
seasons. 
 
14. Students are strictly not allowed to use any type of heaters, blowers, warmers, induction systems, 
iron/press, kettle, heating rods, cooking systems etc. in their room. Unlawful usage of these items will 
lead to immediate expulsion from the hostel and a monetary fine of minimum Rs.5,000/- (Rs. Five 
Thousand) apart from appropriate disciplinary action by the university. 
 
15. Students are instructed not to bring or entertain any unlawful visitor/ trespasser in the hostel premises 
including their room. In case of any emergency/exigency, if parents/near relative/friend has to be allowed 
entry to the hostel, prior written permission must be taken from the Provost, Jamia Hamdard. Failure to do 
the same will lead to expulsion from the hostel, monetary fine as decided by the Provost Office and 
disciplinary action against the erring student from the university. 
 
16. Students are expected to abide with the laws/rules/regulations of the university and hostel. They must maintain 
proper discipline and decorum at all times during their stay in the hostel. Improper behavior like shouting 
unnecessarily, creating ruckus, disturbing others, invasion of privacy of others, littering, keeping rooms and 
surroundings dirty/unhygienic, fighting with others including staff and security personnel, using abusive 
language, intimidating others, obstructing university officials and staff in delivering their duty, damage to hostel 
property/ infrastructure, etc. will be dealt with severe punitive action. Such defaulters will be expelled from the 
hostel and levied monetary fine as decided by the Provost Office. Apart from this, university will also take 
appropriate disciplinary action against such students. 
 
17. The University reserves the right to add or delete any law/rule/norm/regulation for students residing in 
hostels to which students must abide with. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
SPORTS AND CULTURAL ACTIVITIES 
 
Jamia Hamdard has Indoor and Outdoor sports facilities in the campus. For Indoor facilities, a hall consisting of 
well-equipped physical fitness centre/gym, two badminton courts, table tennis, carom board and chess etc. are 
available with day and night facility. For outdoor facilities, Jamia Hamdard has athletic track, well maintained 
cricket ground, football ground and basketball & volleyball courts with proper LED lights for day and night 
matches. 
 
Jamia Hamdard also organizes inter-school sports tournaments (Hamdard Sports Meet) and Literary & Cultural 
Events (Hamdard Fest) annually. Various inter and intra school tournaments are organized by the university 
throughout the year. Various teams of Jamia Hamdard also participate in sports & cultural activities in national, 
regional and zonal level events. Jamia Hamdard has organized zonal and national tournaments in past. The boys 
and girls team of basketball and volley ball participated in inter zonal tournaments organized by Association of 
Indian Universities. The cricket and football teams have also participated in inter-university tournaments 
organized by Association of Indian Universities. 
 
National Service Scheme (NSS) 
 
National Service Scheme (NSS) is a program sponsored by the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
Government of India. The NSS volunteers participate in various awareness program such as Pulse Polio 
Immunization camps, awareness about Hepatitis-B, DPT and BCG immunization, HIV/ AIDS, STD, importance 
of cleanliness, illiteracy eradication program, plantation and related activities.NSS volunteers also participate in 
program sponsored by Delhi AIDS Control Society. NSS volunteers organize blood donation camp every year. 
A 15-day Special camp is organized by NSS volunteers every year in slums of Delhi for community awareness. 
NSS Jamia Hamdard is a member of the Red Ribbon Club which is HIV/AIDS awareness scheme sponsored by 
Government of NCT, Delhi. The number of NSS volunteers in Jamia Hamdard is around two hundred. 
 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) 
 
National Cadet Corps (NCC) is a highly reputed body and has an enormous history to take pride. NCC is not just 
meant for military training, but it has also enabled the cadets to learn several other valuable things for life such 
as selflessness, discipline, hard work, honesty and other leadership qualities. 
 
We have 54 cadets, in which most of the cadets have completed B or C certification and attended various CATC, 
Trekking National Camp, Army Attachment and others National Camps. 
 
NCC Jamia Hamdard also organized an Annual Conference on 30th October 2019 on “contribution of NCC 
Cadets for Nation Building and Global Development”. Our cadets actively participated in COVID-19 duty, also 
performing NukkadNataks, celebrating SwachtaPakhwada Mission of Government of India are routine practices 
of the NCC Jamia Hamdard platoon. 
 
In fact, NCC is always bound to serve the nation by all means and has always risen to occasions of doing so 
through all it developed capabilities. To serve the people, through all means is its basic dictum. 
 
Most recently, various students’ activity Clubs have been commissioned under the aegis of the Dean Students 
Welfare. 
 
The Composition of the club is presented as under: - 
 
1. Mental Health Club 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
2. Drama and Film Club 
 
3. Literary Club 
4. Yoga Club 
5. Music Club 
6. Eco-Club 
7. Sport Club 
(i) Football Club 
(ii) Cricket Club 
(iii) Badminton Club 
 
(iv) Volleyball &Basketball Club 
 
(v) Chess & Carom Club 
(vi) Athletics Club 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
GLIMPSES OF ACTIVITIES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NSS Team with Vice Chancellor 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plantation drive and pledge taking ceremony
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Event organized by School of Nursing and Allied Health 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Symposium organized by SCLS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vigilance Awareness Week
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Food Mela – 2024 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
National Unity Day - 2024
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Guide to Admissions, Jamia Hamdard 
 
HAKEEM MOHAMMED SAID 
 
CENTRAL LIBRARY 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
University Librarian: Dr. Akhtar Parvez 
The University Library is one of the oldest academic institutions, established by the great visionary, the 
late Chancellor Hakeem Abdul Hameed (1908-1999), in 1977. In 1992, it was renamed the Hakeem 
Mohammed Sai’d Central Library (HMSCL) in honour of the founder's younger brother. The Jamia 
Hamdard Library System consists of the HMSCL and six school libraries. The School Libraries include: 
● Hamdard Institute of Legal Studies and Research (HILSR) 
● School of Chemical and Life Sciences (SCLS) 
● School of Interdisciplinary Sciences and Technology (SIST) 
● School of Nursing Science and Allied Health (SNSAH) 
● School of Pharmaceutical Education and Research (SPER)  
● School of Unani Medical Education and Research (SUMER) 
 
The HMSCL is housed in a distinctive, round building, renowned both for its architectural elegance and 
its extensive collection. Surrounded by beautifully landscaped grounds, the library provides a serene 
environment ideal for study and research, making it a prominent landmark within the university. It is 
equipped with Wi-Fi and monitored by CCTV cameras to ensure a secure and connected learning space. 
 
Library Collections and Resources: 
 
● Manuscripts: The library houses more than 3,500 handwritten manuscripts and rare collections, 
preserving valuable knowledge and cultural heritage. 
● Book Collection: The HMS Central Library has over 2 lakh volumes of books. 
● Book Bank Facility: A dedicated Book Bank offers essential textbooks to students on a long-term 
loan basis, supporting their academic needs. 
 
 
● Institutional Repository: The library maintains an Institutional Repository which may be accessed at 
https://repository.jamiahamdard.edu. The repository includes books published by Jamia Hamdard, 
convocation speeches, previous year question papers, etc.). 
The HMSCL continues to serve as a vibrant academic hub, fostering knowledge creation and 
dissemination within Jamia Hamdard (Hamdard University). HMSCL is committed to ensuring that all 
university resources are consolidated under one system, providing users with easy access to these 
resources whenever needed.  
 
The library is fully automated, equipped with Wi-Fi and monitored by CCTV cameras to ensure a secure 
and connected learning space. 
 
Library Working Hours 
 
The HMS Central Library is open from 9 a.m. to 11 p.m. on all days except six holidays i.e. Republic Day 
(26 January), Independence Day (15 August), Gandhi Jayanti (2 October), Eid-al-Fitr, Eid-al-Adha and 
Diwali. 
 
Library 
Sections
● Acquisition Section 
● Book Bank 
● Circulation Section 
● Digital Library 
● Manuscript Section 
● Periodical Section 
● Reference Section 
● Technical Section 
● Textbook Section 
● Theses Section
 
 
 
The HMSCL aims to remain at the forefront of innovation in library services. This includes initiatives like 
streamlining research processes, offering workshops and training sessions, developing processes in the library, 
and ensuring that the library spaces remain inclusive and welcoming for all. 
 
The library is here to support academic journey of the students of the university. We invite you to explore our 
services, and take full advantage of everything we have to offer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jamia Hamdard 
 
Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi-110062 Phone 
No.: +91-11-26059688, 7042519957 
Website: www.jamiahamdard.ac.in 
Email:admissions@jamiahamdard.ac.in 
Director (Admissions):  admission@jamiahamdard.ac.in  
Counsellors:  7042519957/9205774417
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
